The Role of ASHA Workers Part 1: Key Principles for Youth friendly 
health services 
Here we discuss the critical practices for health workers that will enable them to have a dialogue with youth and also assess their own attitudes, in order to build a positive 
relationship with them. These are essential for any health worker to be able to create a 
friendly and open relationship with the youth. 
1. Accepting the autonomy of young people: It is important to treat youth as adults, 
who can take their own life decisions and have the complete right to do the same. Do 
not behave like their parents or protectors based on your own personal moral beliefs. 
Do not advise them and instead be a listener providing full information according to 
their need. 
For instance: 
If a 19-year-old young woman has approached you for information related to abortion, 
which are the responses from you that show or indicate openness: 
Do not worry. You have done the right thing by approaching me. The 
decision to have an abortion is entirely yours. I will take you to the health 
centre and will ensure that this remains confidential. If there is anything 
that is bothering you, please do not hesitate to share with me. 
2. Maintaining Privacy:  Protecting the privacy of youth, especially those who approach 
health workers for advice and information about their problems, especially on issues 
such as contraception is very critical. It is important to ensure that counselling sessions 
or sharing of information is done with privacy in the absence of other people. It's 
common for people to be curious when they see a young person talking to a health 
worker. In such a scenario the health workers should be ready to respond tactically so 
that the curiosity is also responded to and privacy of the person involved is maintained.
For instance: 
If a young married woman has approached you for an emergency contraceptive pill 
at the Anganwadi centre and there are other older women of the village present there, 
how will you talk to her?
Start a casual conversation with her in front of the rest and then look for 
an opportune moment to talk to her in private or set up another time 
and date to meet her personally. If any elder women asks about the topic 
of conversation, you could think of something else to say, like “she had 
come to ask about fever or stomach upset or vaccinations etc”. 
You could request the older women to leave the centre by excusing 
yourself saying that you have a report to complete. You could then speak 
to the young woman after everyone has left. 

3. Maintaining confidentiality: Considering that community health workers often 
belong to the community itself, it is challenging to provide information and extend 
support to young members and ensure that confidentiality of the matter is maintained. 
It is natural for young people to hesitate in sharing their personal issues with ANMs 
and ASHA workers who often have day to day interactions with their families. Thus, 
it is important for health service providers to work on building trust and assure 
that whatever is shared with them will not be spoken about with anyone and will 
remain confidential. It is important to remember that in case of vulnerable groups 
like HIV positive or persons with different sexual orientation (LGBTQIA) persons, 
confidentiality is of the utmost importance. Community health workers need to stress 
frequently that all matters would be kept confidential. 
For instance: 
There might be a situation when a newly married young girl from the village is asks 
you about contraceptive pills and methods, you know her family and are aware that 
her mother-in-law is keen on having grandchildren in the family soon. 
You will keep the matter confidential and give her counselling about 
the contraceptive methods. You allow her to take contraceptive pills in a 
confidential manner. If the mother-in-law asks, you will not inform her 
about what the daughter-in law is taking, you will take the call to counsel 
or not counsel the mother-in-law.

4. Sensitive and Respectful behaviour: Apart from respecting the freedom of youth, it 
is important to treat them with dignity. Address them by their name, do not threaten 
or intimidate them instead listen to them in a non-judgmental way. This is the duty of a 
health worker. 
For instance: 
If a young woman talks to you about her irregular menstrual cycle, then what would be 
the appropriate sensitive and respectful response?
This is common when girls are growing up. There is no need to worry. 
First, could you tell me a bit about your diet? Do you eat three proper 
meals a day? 

5. Non-critical attitude: A non-critical attitude makes health workers more 
approachable for young people. If health workers have a non-judgemental attitude 
about pre-marital sex, abortion, sexual orientation etc. and are able to behave in a non-
discriminatory manner, then young people will be encouraged to share their thoughts 
without hesitation. 
For instance: 
If an unmarried young girl speaks about her pregnancy, how would you respond to 
her?
There is no need to be fearful. I'm here with you. Could you share if this 
was a consensual relationship or if you were forced or pressurised in any 
way? Even if you have made this choice you can tell me openly. There 
is nothing wrong about it. You can speak to me without any hesitation, 
these are your options now. I will help you in whatever way you would 
like.

6. Accepting the sexual rights and sexuality of young people: Young people have 
the complete right to make decisions about their own bodies and also to choose their 
sexuality. If they choose to exercise this right, which might be against societal norms, 
their choices should not be questioned. Health workers should not question their 
choices citing their young age as a reason. You have to accept their choices and provide 
them the service and support they need as per their requirements with dignity and 
respect. 

For instance: 
If young unmarried men or women ask for condoms, how would you talk to them? 
You can take this pack of condoms. Do remember that your sexual 
relationship must be consensual. 


7. Providing clear, correct and complete information: Sexual and reproductive health 
are sensitive issues around which there are several pre-existing notions and myths in 
the society. A community health worker can play an important role in dismantling 
these myths and preconceived notions. It is thus critical that health workers are 
equipped with full and clear information about their subject matter, and it is only that 
they can provide the same to the youth. 
For instance: 
If a young woman does not want to continue with her unintended pregnancy but is 
concerned that if she carries out an abortion, she will never be able to get pregnant 
again. What will be your response in such a situation?
You will inform her that if a safe procedure of abortion is provided by 
a trained medical practitioner then there will not be any complications 
in the future and her future fertility will not be affected. With this 
information she will be able to make her own decision. You extend 
support to help her by providing her access to a safe and trained medical 
practitioner at a health centre. 

8. Taking Consent: Since young people are adults, before sharing any information 
about them with anyone else, taking their consent is a must, be it a medical practitioner 
or a family member. Before seeking consent provide detailed background information 
as to why sharing the matter is important. 
For instance: 
If a woman would like to go in for an HIV test. You feel that you need to discuss the 
matter with a medical practitioner before providing support for the test service. How 
will you discuss the matter? 
Good that you have brought this matter to me. Testing will require a visit 
to the hospital. Before we do that, may I share the details of your case 
with the doctor? In case any other tests need to be done I will find out the 
details. I will not be sharing your name with the doctor – you can share it 
as per your level of comfort. 

9. Accepting the diversities amongst the youth: It is important to understand that 
young people are part of different communities, based on their sexuality, caste, 
ethnicity, ability, religion, income, region, occupation etc. Their diverse backgrounds 
may affect their sexual and reproductive health needs. It is important to be sensitive 
and conscious of the social context of the communities that youth come from when 
they approach you. Apart from this, adolescents and youth are in the process 
of understanding their sexualities and bodies and therefore assure them about 
confidentiality at every stage. 
For instance: 
How will you ensure participation of a young girl in your village who is visually 
impaired and cannot attend meetings on her own?
You will talk to her privately whether there is a friend or neighbour 
whom she could tie up with to come for the meeting. You could then 
help her by assigning the task to that friend or neighbour. You will also 
ensure that she is engaged in the meeting. If, for instance, if you are 
talking about menstrual hygiene and using a sanitary napkin you will 
ensure that you provide her with a napkin which she can touch and feel 
to understand how to use it. 
Young people are the foundations of supportive health care services 
and it is critical to respond to their challenges sensitively and with 
respect, protecting their sexual freedom and rights in providing them the 
necessary health services. 

Part 2: Case Studies
In this part we try to understand the challenges faced by youth in accessing sexual and 
reproductive health services with the help of case studies. The case studies will help 
the ASHAs and other health workers understand their own role in resolving issues and 
providing better health care services to youth for a happier and fulfilling future life. The 
case studies are based on situations that you may have already faced in your everyday 
work environment. While you read these, you may review your own situations and 
assess how you could better address dilemmas and solve issues that you faced in those 
circumstances.

Case Study 1: Reshma’s Confusion - Menstrual Hygiene Management
Reshma is a 13-year-old 
adolescent girl who started her 
menstrual cycle about 6 months 
ago. Since there are no toilets 
in her school, she does not go 
to school during her menstrual 
periods. Rohini, an ASHA 
worker in the village found out 
about this. On further inquiry 
she learnt that there are many 
other girls in the village who 
do not attend school during 
their periods due to absence of 
toilets in the school campus. 
Rohini first shared this information with other Anganwadi workers and then called for 
a meeting of the adolescent girls in the village to discuss the matter. She offered them 
sanitary napkins and tried to convince them to attend school during their periods. The 
girls urged that they would need a place to change the pads during school hours. The 
girls suggested to Rohini that she should speak to the school teachers and headmaster 
on this subject. This put Rohini and the Aanganwadi workers in a tough spot as their 
task was to distribute sanitary napkins only. Now what should they do?

Points of Discussion:
Question 1: Why were the adolescent girls refusing to go to school during the periods 
despite having access to sanitary pads?
Answer:  Due to the absence of fully functional toilets and dustbins adolescent girls were 
not ready to attend school during their periods. Toilets are essential for managing the 
periods. Not just a fully functional and clean toilet, but also one that has running water and 
a dustbin with proper disposal mechanism (cover) for the sanitary napkins is essential. The 
absence of this makes it difficult for adolescents to attend school and many a times they 
even end up dropping out of school at this age, due to these issues. 
Question 2. Do you think that the ASHA and Anganwadi worker can intervene in this 
situation? If yes, then how?
Answer: When Rohini and the Anganwadi worker found out that the girls had stopped 
attending school during their periods due to absence of toilets, they could approach the 
school authorities, headmaster and principal with this problem so that the necessary 
arrangements for the toilets could be made. If this does not yield a positive response, then 
Rohini and the Anganwadi worker could raise the issue with the Panchayat representatives 
on the Village Health, Hygiene and Nutrition day.


What are your responsibilities as a health worker in such a situation?
• As a health worker your responsibility is to not just distribute the sanitary napkins 
but also explain the proper method of using and disposal to the adolescent girls.
• Additionally, an important role is to break any myths and remove misconceptions 
with regard to menstrual cycle and taboos.
• Just providing sanitary napkins is not enough, but enquiring about and facilitating 
the availability of toilets, dustbins and other sanitary measures is also a key 
responsibility.
How can menstrual hygiene be maintained during periods?
• During periods a sanitary napkin should be used. If sanitary napkin is not available, 
then a clean cloth or cloth pad must be used to absorb the bleeding. This needs to be 
placed/lined inside the underwear. 
• Hands must be washed with soap before changing the napkin. Cloth and 
underwear must also be washed well with soap and put to dry in the sun so that no 
bacteria is formed. 
• A sanitary napkin is made of materials that completely absorbs the menstrual 
bleeding.
• This should be used for about 4 to 6 hours and then needs to be disposed in a 
dustbin after covering and wrapping with a newspaper. 
• A sanitary napkin cannot be reused.
• After changing the sanitary napkin or pad hands must be washed with soap
• During periods bathing daily and washing the genitals with clean water is essential.


There are many myths in our society related to menstrual blood, 
which is often considered impure and dirty. It is due to this belief that 
entry of women in the kitchen or temples is often restricted during 
periods. Many communities even have beliefs like women who are 
menstruating should not touch pickles else the pickle will get spoilt. 
This belief is not based on facts. The fact is that the discharge during 
menstruation is made up of different elements like blood, cells and 
tissues. In fact, the discharge is composed of less blood and more 
of other material. The discharge is the outer lining formed in the 
uterus that is supposed to aid the development of the foetus when/if 
conception happens.
The onset of menstruation is one of the key bodily changes in the 
female adolescence phase. The age of onset of menstruation varies for 
everybody. The time of onset of menstruation could be hereditary and 
depends on different body types and nothing more than that! Similarly, 
the amount of menstrual discharge is also different for different 
women. Regular excessive bleeding could also be an indicator of some 
health issues and this needs to be assessed by a health practitioner. 
The menstrual cycle is experienced differently by different women. It is 
common to experience aches and pains in the abdomen, thighs, breasts 
and muscles during periods due to which carrying on heavy activity 
and physical labour may be difficult. Some women experience very 
severe pain in abdomen during this period and are unable to work. In 
such a situation forcing and pressurising women to carry on with daily 
chores is a violation of their basic human rights. 
Additionally, stopping women who choose to carry on with daily 
physical and other activities just because they are on their menstrual 
period and maybe experiencing discomfort is also a violation of their 
basic human right. 
The decision to carry out work during period, should be left to the 
woman and whatever choice is made by her needs to be respected.
In young adolescent girls, periods may not be regular in the first 
few years and this is normal, however if a woman misses a period 
or menstrual cycle after being sexually active, it could be a sign of 
having conceived. In order to ascertain pregnancy, a pregnancy test 
is important and may be used. Several times there could be other 
factors for a late period. It could happen that someone who has not 
been sexually active and has a regular cycle may get a late period. This 
could be due to some other health issue and needs to be examined by a 
doctor. 

Case Study 2: Kavita’s decision
Kavita is a 19-year-old woman 
who lives in a small town 
with her parents. She takes 
tuitions for little children. 
She has a boyfriend and once 
had unprotected sex with her 
friend, after which she got 
pregnant. She was 3 months 
pregnant and unable to share 
about the pregnancy with 
anyone. 
She visited a female doctor at 
Primary Health Centre located 
3 kms from her home, with 
her boyfriend to inquire about 
having an abortion, because the centre closer to her home had many people who knew 
her. She applied sindoor (red vermillion applied in the hair-parting used by married 
women) but when the doctor asked her how long she had been married, she was not 
able to give a clear answer. This made the doctor suspicious and she asked Kavita to 
return again with her mother-in-law. 
An ASHA worker who had heard this conversation that Kavita had with the doctor 
told Kavita that she could support her getting an abortion and that no one would find 
out about the same. She told Kavita that she would introduce her to a private nurse 
who could give her some abortion pills for Rs 5000/-. Kavita had no clue what to do.

Points of Discussion:
Question 1. The doctor refused to give Kavita an abortion. Was this the right thing to do?
Answer: The doctor had figured that Kavita was unmarried and that she was sexually 
active. She refused to extend medical support for abortion to Kavita because in our society 
pre-marital sex is considered to be taboo. The doctor should not have done this because 
19-year-old Kavita had the right to decide if she wanted to terminate the pregnancy. 
According to the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act 1971, any unmarried woman 
who is not physically and mentally ready to continue with her pregnancy can approach a 
certified medical practitioner for the termination of her pregnancy. Considering that Kavita 
was above 18 years of age, this did not require the consent of her family members. 
Question 2. Did the ASHA worker give Kavita the correct advice?
Answer: The ASHA worker did not give Kavita any advice related to Medical termination 
of pregnancy. It was completely wrong of her to direct Kavita to a private nurse for 
abortion. She was perhaps attempting to take advantage of Kavita’s helplessness. Only a 
certified medical practitioner can advise on the procedure for abortion of pregnancy. 
Further, since Kavita was 3 months pregnant, abortion pills would not have been effective 
in her case. What the ASHA worker did was illegal and could have put Kavita’s life in 
danger.
Question 3. What kind of support should the ASHA worker have extended to Kavita?
Answer: The ASHA worker should again discussed with the doctor and helped Kavita to 
access the correct information and services for abortion at the hospital. If the doctor did not 
agree, she should have told Kavita about another hospital where safe and legal abortion 
is provided. She should have also provided Kavita with information about contraception 
methods and safe sex.

 What are your responsibilities as a health worker in such a situation?
• Health Workers should support young people by maintaining privacy and 
confidentiality.
• Without any preconceived notions or questions, the person should be provided with 
information about hospitals where safe and legal abortion services are available. 
• In order to protect privacy, you could take the person to a centre where they are not 
identified or known by others.
• After the termination of pregnancy, adequate follow up is important to help identify 
any complications and in case of a problem support must be given to access medical 
help/facilities.
• Provide all information about various available contraceptive methods. 
• Provide information related to the negative implications of unprotected sex like 
sexually transmitted diseases and unwanted pregnancy. Talk to them about the 
importance of safe sex. 

Is abortion legalised in India?
Yes, the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act 1971 allows the medical termination of 
pregnancy under certain conditions. The law allows termination of pregnancy at any 
certified clinic, hospital or health centre. 
Under what conditions is the Medical Termination of Pregnancy considered legal? 
• The pregnancy is life threatening for the woman or puts her in physical or mental 
stress
• If the pregnancy is due to sexual assault or rape
• If the pregnancy is due to failure of a contraceptive method used by the couple
• If the foetus has shown signs of physical, mental or other disability
Does Medical Termination of Pregnancy require the consent of any other person?
Any woman above the age of 18 years can give her own consent for the termination of 
pregnancy. 
In case the woman is below the age of 18 or she is unable to give her consent due to a 
mental condition then the termination of pregnancy requires the consent of parents/ 
guardian/an adult (who maybe relative or friend). 
What is the period for getting a pregnancy terminated? 
A pregnancy can be terminated upto 20 weeks of conception. Under “2020 
Amendments to Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act” the gestational limit 
for termination of pregnancy has been increased up to 24 weeks under special 
circumstance. In case of congenital anomaly termination of pregnancy can even be 21
 done beyond 24 weeks. For this an opinion of medical board constituted at state level is 
essential.
What are the various methods of terminating a pregnancy safely?
There are 2 ways of terminating a pregnancy safely. One is through medicines & the 
other through a surgical intervention. A pregnancy upto 9 weeks a pregnancy can be 
safely terminated by using medicines for medical abortion. 
Termination of pregnancy should always be carried out by a registered and certified 
medical practitioner after appropriate advice. It is unsafe and illegal to use ‘other’ 
methods of aborting a pregnancy and could lead to severe complications which may be 
life threatening for the concerned woman. 
Where can termination of pregnancy be carried out? 
Whether through medication or surgery the termination of pregnancy must always be 
carried out at an approved facility and a certified provider after proper screening.
What could be the negative implications of not providing the right information 
about termination of pregnancy? 
When healthcare provider does not provide services as per woman’s situation or fails 
to give full and clear information about termination of pregnancy women often come 
under pressure to opt for unsafe methods of terminating their pregnancy. This could 
lead to complications, infections and even cause death in extreme cases. 


A certified medical practitioner may terminate the pregnancy of any 
unmarried woman who decides the same. If the pregnancy is due to 
sexual assault or the pregnancy could cause mental or physical harm to 
the health of the woman it is not illegal. 
Any woman above the age of 18 can give her own consent for the 
termination of pregnancy and this will be entirely her decision. Legally 
there is no need for parental or guardian’s consent, medical practitioner 
cannot insist on the consent of parents or guardians for the same.
In case the woman is below the age of 18, the termination of pregnancy 
requires the consent of either parents/ guardian/ or any adult (who 
may be a relative or a friend). The medical practitioner cannot insist 
that the consent be from ‘parents’.22
Medical abortion (abortion using pills) is a very safe method if the 
duration of pregnancy is within the 9 weeks period. It is not harmful 
for the health of the adolescent girl neither is it illegal. 

Skills that save lives 
Case Study 3: Rama’s Dilemma - What has happened to me?
Rama is a 19-year-old 
unmarried woman. She is 
doing her graduation at a 
college close to her village. 
Rama has a boyfriend who 
mostly lives in the city. When 
he visited the village recently 
he and Rama had unprotected 
sex. A few days later Rama 
found a yellow discharge from 
her vagina. At first, she ignored 
it but later she found pus 
formation around her genitals. 
She was scared to find this 
and after much thinking she 
decided to approach an ASHA 
worker for advice. The ASHA worker asked Rama about her sexual activity and then 
scolded her. 
She told her that she did not approve this and she helps only the married women in 
cases of reproductive health related problems. She not just refused to help Rama but 
also told her that she would tell Rama’s family members about this. 

 Points of Discussion:
Question 1. What had happened to Rama?
Answer:  Rama had had unprotected sex and the symptoms she had (yellow discharge 
from the vagina) was indicative of a sexually transmitted infection. This could be identified 
through a medical examination.
Question 2. Did the ASHA Worker do the right thing by scolding Rama?
Answer:  The ASHA worker should certainly not have scolded Rama for being sexually 
active without being married. Being sexually active at this age is natural. The decision 
about the same has to be made by the persons themselves, what is important is that the 
sexual relation are consensual and safe. The ASHA worker should not have let her own 
preconceived notions influence her providing the right information to Rama. 
Question 3. What kind of support should the ASHA worker have provided to Rama?
Answer:  The ASHA worker should have informed Rama about the implications of 
unprotected sex such as, sexually transmitted infections, pregnancy etc. The worker should 
have given full information about the symptoms of sexually transmitted infections and 
suggested that she get a medical examination done at a health centre. 
The ASHA workers should also have given information about protected and safe sex and 
use of the condom, she could have also given her information about sexual hygiene. ASHA 
worker should have assured her about confidentiality in the matter. 
What are Sexually Transmitted Infections? (STIs)
Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) are the infections transmitted from one person 
to another primarily by sexual contact. They can occur due to unprotected sexual 
activity with an infected partner or having unsafe sex with multiple sexual partners. 
Chlamydia, Gonorrhoea, Hepatitis B, Herpes Simplex, Syphilis, HIV (which develops 
into AIDS) are some common sexually transmitted infections. 
Some of the common symptoms of STI include: Burning, itching, boils, pus, discharge, 
swelling, foul smell, pain during sexual intercourse, frequent urination, disruption of 
menstrual cycle etc
What are the ways of having safer sex?
Use of condoms can prevent infections 
Never use two condoms at once 24
 Having a dialogue with your partner and taking consent before indulging in sex, 
discuss past partners and history of STIs and drug use with your partner
Avoid (unprotected) sexual contact, if either of the partner has an STI
Do not neglect any unusual discharge and seek help early
Ensuring complete treatment of self and sexual partner (partner treatment)

No! Providing information on sexual and reproductive health 
has nothing to do with youth indulging more in sexual activities. 
Neither does it lead to ‘dangerous or risky behaviour’. As we are 
aware, children start experiencing changes in their bodies from 
the age of 10 years. Also, adolescence is a phase where getting 
attracted to others is common and so is curiosity about sexual 
activity. Providing full information about sexual health gives them 
an opportunity to understand their bodies, the various changes 
they are experiencing and protect themselves from unsafe sex and 
violation of their sexual and bodily space and rights. Having logical 
and factual information about sexual health also equips adolescents 
to take better decisions for a healthy, secure and content life. 
Some STIs like HIV and Chlamydia for instance do not show any 
symptoms initially. Thus, if any person has had unprotected sex 
with a new partner, it is better to get a regular medical examination 
for STI done two weeks after having unprotected sex. 
No! Medications should be continued as per the advice of the 
medical practitioner. Sometimes the infection stays in the body 
even after the symptoms have disappeared. If identified in a timely 
manner, all STIs can be treated, however, if not treated completely 
then they can cause more serious health issues and complications. 
 Case Study 4: Which contraceptive is right for me?
Preeti is a 23-year-old woman 
who is married and lives in the 
city with her husband and his 
family. She has a one-year-old 
daughter. Preeti does not want 
to have her next child for the 
next 5 years. She spoke about 
this to her husband and he is 
also in agreement for the same. 
She went to an ASHA worker 
to seek help and information 
about family planning 
methods. 
The ASHA worker gave her 
information about Copper-T, 
an IUD, and called Preeti over 
to the Primary Health Centre 
to get the IUD insertion. Preeti 
was not keen to get the IUD 
inserted and asked instead for some contraceptive pills or injection that she could use. 
The ASHA worker said that the IUD was the best option for Preeti and that she 
shouldn’t give it so much thought.
Points of Discussion:
Question 1. Do you think Preeti was given the right advice by the ASHA worker?
Answer: No! The ASHA worker should not have insisted that Preeti get the IUD inserted. 
Also, Preeti was vocal about not wanting the IUD, and the ASHA worker should have 
respected her decision. 
Question 2. If someone comes to you seeking advice on contraceptive methods what 
should you do?
Answer:
• Give complete and accurate information about all available contraceptive methods.26
 • Clear out any misconceptions about existing contraceptive methods.
• Do not insist on the use of any one type of method.
• Inform about the centres where different contraceptive methods would be available to 
them. If a method of client’s choice is not available at the public health facility, inform 
them about other facilities.
• All information should be provided irrespective of the marital status of the person. 
• Provide information to young people about emergency contraception pills and provide 
them the emergency contraception pills if needed. 

ASHA Worker may provide condoms, emergency 
contraception and contraceptive pills like Mala-N to 
unmarried (single) young men and women.
For the first time users, dose it is critical that it is 
prescribed by the doctor/Staff nurse/ANM/SLHV 
after proper screening of the client. However, the 
same is not required from the second dose onwards.1 
For second dose onwards, home delivery of Mala-N 
contraceptive pill can be done by ASHA.
If a woman wants to use a contraceptive method, 
consent of her husband/male partner/family member 
is not needed. Some men do not prefer using condoms 
during sex as they believe it reduces the experience of 
pleasure. Getting consent from the male partner would 
mean that women’s access to birth control measures 
may get restricted. Thus, it is important to let the 
women or the individual be primary decision makers 
in choice of contraception. 

Irrespective of the nature of the relationship, partners 
need to discuss openly about the use of contraception 
amongst themselves. Often, the burden of ensuring 
birth control falls on the women, simply because 
the women are affected to such a large extent by the 
birth of a child. Still, men have an important role and 
responsibility in birth control:
1. Learn about the different birth control methods 
available by accompanying your partner to the 
health centre/clinic or procuring a contraceptive 
method from a pharmacy
2. Support the choice of contraceptive method that 
your partner is making
3. Ensuring the proper use of condoms during sex
4. Choosing to have a vasectomy, if a couple decides 
to have a permanent method

Case Study 5: With whom should Vimla share her feelings?
Vimla is a 20-year-old woman who has been married for around 5 months and 
lives with her husband in the village. He works in a cloth factory. Vimla has been 
experiencing a yellow vaginal discharge for a few days. She also started experiencing 
some pain during sexual intercourse. When this started troubling her more, she 
decided to visit an ASHA worker. She was seeking information about the symptoms 
and also wanted ASHA to accompany her to the Primary Health Centre. 
But when Vimla did visit the ASHA worker, she was unable to communicate about 
her problem openly. She told the ASHA worker that she was experiencing some pain 
in the abdomen. The ASHA worker was also unable to read Vimla’s expressions. She 
assumed that Vimla was probably going through some menstrual period related pain, 
gave her advice to cope with the pain and sent her home. And so Vimla returned 
without having her problem addressed. 
 Points of Discussion:
Question 1. What was the reason for Vimla’s hesitation in talking about her health issue?
Answer: Vimla was unable to speak about her problem due to shame and fear. She was 
feeling conscious to discuss the issue because it was about her sexual and reproductive 
health. She was scared of being judged by the ASHA worker and perhaps anxious that 
someone may get to know of her problem and she would be shamed for it. 
Question 2. What should have been the response of the ASHA in this situation?
Answer: The ASHA worker should have gauged Vimla’s expressions and inquired some 
more about her health conditions. She could’ve reassured her by using words like, “Don’t 
be afraid, what you tell me will be absolutely confidential. I'm here to help young women 
with their health-related problems”. She should’ve made Vimla comfortable and created 
an atmosphere of openness, so that Vimla would have trusted her. Then the ASHA worker 
could have spoken to her about the problems of unprotected sex and advised that she and 
her husband get a medical examination and treatment at the health centre. 
What should be done when a young person approaches you with a sexual health 
related problem?
• The shame around sexual-reproductive organs prevents many people from talking 
about the problems related to these parts of the body openly and freely. It is 
important to create a safe space so that young people are able to trust the health 
workers and talk freely about their sexual and reproductive health related concerns.
• ASHA worker should understand that young people may not state their actual need 
right in the beginning and they might be hesitant and try to give them time to open 
up. It is important to be as sensitive as possible and to listen to what the person is 
trying to communicate to slowly build trust. 
• Reassuring about protecting their privacy and maintaining confidentiality is 
essential.
• Give them the complete information about the various sexual health related issues 
and refer them to the right place for further examination and treatment.
• If required accompany the young person to the health centre.

STIs are spread predominantly by sexual contact, including 
vaginal, anal and oral sex. Some STIs can also be spread 
through non-sexual means such as via blood or blood 
products. Some STIs—like Syphilis, hepatitis B and HIV 
etc. can also be transmitted from mother to child during 
pregnancy and childbirth.
 So sexually transmitted infections are not just because of 
unprotected sex but could be due to several other factors as 
well. Thus, an STI is not necessarily indicative of the person 
having multiple sexual partners.
aginal wetness and some discharge from the vagina are 
common. In fact, these are natural self-cleansing mechanisms 
of the body to keep the vagina free of infections. 
The nature and amount of vaginal discharge varies depending 
on the menstrual and ovulation cycle. However, a marked 
change in the amount, colour and smell of discharge can be 
indicative of infection. This can be ascertained through a 
medical examination by a certified medical practitioner.

Case Study 6: Thankyou, Sarita Didi!
Kamla is a 23-year-old who is 
pregnant. Her husband Raju 
does labour work for a living in 
a city 200 kms from the village. 
Recently, when Kamla was 
visiting Raju in the city, Kamla 
went for ante natal check-up 
to the clinic. The day she went 
to fetch her results the nurse 
told Kamla that she has tested 
positive for HIV. She also 
informed her that her foetus 
could also be HIV positive. The 
day Kamla collected the result, 
the doctor had not arrived so 
she was asked to come again 
the next day. However, since her mother-in-law in the village suddenly fell ill Kamla 
had to go back to the village. Raju told her that he would take her to the health centre in 
a few days when he would visit home. 
Back in the village Kamla kept worrying about the child in her womb and whether it 
would also be infected with HIV. She was scared for the future. Kamla did not want to 
share about her being HIV positive with her family. After going through some days of 
anxiety she decided to meet the ASHA worker named Sarita, in her village. 
30
 Sarita had not dealt with such a case before. Though Sarita had known about HIV 
through training, she did not have practical knowledge and information on the subject. 
She told Kamla, “Don’t’ worry. I’ll try to find out more about this soon and let you 
know”. The next day Sarita got the complete information from the doctor at the P.H.C 
and the doctor also told her that she could bring the HIV positive patient to the hospital 
anytime in the next few days. The next day Sarita took Kamla to the P.H.C. The doctor 
gave Kamla the full information and clarified her doubts. Additionally, the doctor 
advised Kamla on precautions to take and tests to be done and asked her to visit the 
PPTCT centre. 
Sarita reassured Kamla that she would not tell anyone about her condition and Kamla 
was relaxed and went home at ease. 

Points of Discussion:
Question 1. According to you, why was Kamla hesitant about disclosing her HIV status 
to her family? Was she right in thinking this way?
Answer: There are several myths around HIV prevailing in our society even today. 
Many still believe that an HIV infection can spread by touching a positive person or 
eating with them. There is social stigma around HIV infected persons and they have to 
face discrimination in their community. This could be the reason why Kamla was not 
comfortable about disclosing her condition to the family. 
The decision to share about her condition only lies with Kamla and no other person has the 
right to disclose her status. 
Question 2. What did you learn from Sarita’s response in this case? 
Answer:  Sarita did not have full information about HIV and thus she chose not to counsel 
Kamla on it. She decided to first equip herself with the complete information. She made the 
effort to go to the PHC and reassured Kamla that she would maintain full confidentiality in 
the matter. Similarly, if you are approached by someone who has a condition about which 
you are not sure of, it is always advisable to visit a medical practitioner and not provide 
half-baked or misleading information. Also, confidentiality and privacy of the infected 
person is to be maintained. 

While there is no complete treatment for HIV as yet, the anti-
retroviral therapy is said to be effective in controlling and 
regulating the impact of the virus. The medication is available 
across the country at ART centres and it improves the quality of 
life and life expectancy of HIV infected persons.
It is important to remember that HIV does not spread through 
touch, sharing food, and mosquito bites etc. Due to these 
misconceptions, there is social stigma around HIV and AIDS 
and infected persons face exclusion and discrimination. In order 
to protect infected persons from discrimination, it is important 
to maintain privacy and confidentiality about their identity. 

Case Study 7: Chintu’s worries
Chintu is a 14-year-old boy 
living in Bhagalpur village. 
Since the last few days Chintu 
has been experiencing pressure 
around his penis and when he 
wakes up in the morning, he 
finds that his underwear is wet. 
This makes Chintu feel ASHA 
and he wants to talk about this 
with someone but not sure 
who. He is worried that he may 
be suffering from some illness. 
Listening to the conversations 
amongst his peers in school, 
he feels even more concerned 
about this. 
He once heard the ASHA worker in his village discussing sexual health with some 
young girls. He is wondering if he should speak to her about his ‘condition’ but 
feels hesitant about this. There are many questions in his mind which also affect his 
confidence, for e.g., “What if ASHA didi thinks badly about me when I talk to her? 
What if she tells others about it? What would I tell her about this?”

Points of Discussion:
Question 1. Do you think it is difficult for adolescent boys to obtain information about 
sexual and reproductive health? What could be the negative implications of this?
Answer: It is natural for adolescents to be concerned about the bodily changes that they 
experience because there are few safe spaces for them to talk about these openly. The main 
source of information on sexual and reproductive health for boys are their peers or the 
internet. However, this information is half-baked and inaccurate and this makes it even 
more concerned. It could even impact their health and emotional state negatively. 
Question 2. Do you think Chintu’s hesitation is justified? What could be the reasons 
behind it?
Answer:  Since most of the ASHA workers, ANMs and staff of the Primary Health Centre 
are also members of the community, it is natural for adolescent boys to feel anxious about 
approaching them. Also, sexual and reproductive health is a taboo topic in society and it is 
considered ‘bad’ or ‘dirty’ or ‘unnecessary’ for adolescent boys to talk about it. Since young 
people who try to access information about sexual-reproductive issues are often looked 
down upon they hesitate to talk to ASHA workers on the subject. 
If any adolescent boy approaches you to seek information about their bodily changes 
or sexual and reproductive health, then the following need to be kept in mind: 
• If you have some hesitation on the subject, it's best to deal with it first. It is your 
responsibility to equip yourself with accurate and full information on sexual and 
reproductive health issues. We must not let our own personal dilemmas interfere or 
influence our work. 
• Reassure them about confidentiality and keep the discussion private. 
• If the person approaching you is hesitant, inform them that having questions related 
to bodily changes is absolutely normal and this does not make them bad or dirty. 

Nightfall is not a disease. During adolescence and onset of puberty 
it is a common occurrence (mostly at night) when a person feels 
sexually excited and reaches ejaculation (expulsion of semen 
through the penis). This can happen even without any external 
stimulation or conscious sexual activity.
No, masturbation does not lead to blindness or impotency. Neither 
does it lead to a loss of sperms because they are being regularly 
produced by the body. 
Masturbation is a natural and completely safe and secure method 
of obtaining sexual pleasure through stimulation of one’s own 
sexual organs. It is nothing to be Ashamed about. All of us have 
sexual needs and this is a common way of fulfilling them. Only if it 
starts interfering with our day-to-day functioning in any way then a 
counsellor or medical practitioner may be referred to. 
Case Study 8: Mansi’s question- My body, whose rights? 
Mansi is a 21-year-old young woman who just got married to Naresh. About 2 months 
after marriage, Mansi missed her period by one week. After using the pregnancy 
test, she found out that she was pregnant. Mansi was not mentally prepared to have 
a child given her own young age and the fact that Naresh too was not ready for the 
responsibility. She didn’t want to continue this pregnancy.
In this matter Mansi decided to approach Savitri, an ASHA worker in her village. She 
had decided to have an abortion and needed her support for the same. Savitiri was a 
little shocked to hear this. She asked Mansi whether her in-laws are aware about this 
decision. Mansi informed her that she had only spoken to Naresh about the pregnancy 
and both of them had decided to terminate it. She did not want to tell her in-laws, in 
case they would pressurise her to continue the pregnancy. Savitri said “Oh child! You 
are young and this is a good age to have children. If you have kids now, they will be 
healthy. 
After terminating the pregnancy, you may face problems in future childbirth. It’s a very 
dangerous process. And without the permission of your in-laws, I will not be able to 
help you. If they ask me, what will I tell them?” 34
Points of discussion: 
Question 1. Why do you think Savitiri was against Mansi’s decision to terminate the 
pregnancy?
Answer: Our society believes that every woman should become a mother as early as 
possible after marriage. Due to this belief, women’s own choice is often disregarded and 
their right to take decisions about their body is not respected. Further, it is also believed 
that pregnancies are more successful at a younger age and the health of the child is 
impacted in late pregnancies. Such misconceptions can occur because of lack of proper 
information about termination of pregnancy It was due to these reasons that Savitri was not 
supportive of Mansi’s decision. 
Question 2. If you were in place of Savitri, would you have responded similarly? If not, 
then what would you say?
Answer:  The decision to terminate a pregnancy lies with the woman, who has the full 
right to choose whether or not and when she wants to have a child. No consent of family 
members is required when an adult woman decides to terminate her pregnancy. Women 
may choose not to have children for various reasons – pursuing higher studies, or lack 
of emotional, mental, physical or financial readiness to have a child. So, if someone 
approaches you for information on termination of pregnancy it is important to provide the 
full and clear information and also help her in accessing services for the same. 

1. Termination of pregnancy if carried out by a registered and 
certified medical practitioner safely will not cause infertility.
2. Medical termination of pregnancy (using medical abortion) 
does not impact the ability to conceive in future.
3. If termination of pregnancy is done by unsafe methods or by 
untrained persons then it may lead to infections which may 
affect the fertility of the woman hence it is critical to provide 
the correct information about abortion to the concerned 
person
 Any woman in her reproductive age may face the need to have 
an abortion. It is due to their unique circumstances that most 
women decide to terminate their pregnancy. The following 
could be the reasons for unwanted pregnancy.
1. Sexual assault or forceful sexual intercourse by the partner,
2. Failure of contraceptive method.
3. Change in life circumstances of the pregnant woman – 
separation or conflict with partner for instance
4. In some circumstances, women might be under pressure to 
engage in sexual intercourse 
5. Women are unable to use contraception because they are 
unable to exercise control over their own bodies. 
Under the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act 1971 certified 
and trained medical practitioners are to provide full services 
related to medical termination of pregnancy, under certain 
conditions. These are: 
• The pregnancy is life threatening for the woman or puts her 
in physical or mental stress
• If the pregnancy is due to sexual assault or rape
• If the pregnancy is due to failure of a contraceptive method
Beliefs like ‘abortion is an act of murder’ are a violation of 
a woman’s reproductive rights and her freedom of choice/ 
control over her own body. The health, choice and freedom of 
women should be given primacy. 

 Case Study 9: Simran didi - ASHA worker and a friend too!
Shobha who is 16 years old 
has had a very irregular period 
for some time. Her abdominal 
cramps have also been more 
severe. She considered visiting 
the health centre, but was 
hesitant to go on her own.
She wanted to ask her mother 
to accompany her, but she 
would leave for the farm early 
in the morning and would 
return only late in the evening. 
Shobha thought of speaking 
to Simran didi, who was an 
ASHA worker in the village 
and had once held a session with adolescent girls in the village on menstruation. “Yes, 
she will help me out”, thought Simran to herself. Simran didi was popular in the village 
and usually friendly with people. 
Shobha visited Simran didi and told her about her problem. “Didi please come with 
me, please!” she said. 
Simran thought to herself “Oh, today is the last day of the month and I still have to 
complete my targets. How can I get out today and go with Shobha “? After Shobha’s 
repeated insistence, Simran felt it was best to accompany her and hence went with her 
to the PHC. 

Points of Discussion:
Question 2. What did you learn from this story about the role of an ASHA worker?
Answer:  Through this story we can learn that an ASHA worker can play a critical role 
in addressing issues faced by adolescents. This is because adolescents not only have 
information about sexual and reproductive health but also face societal restrictions and lack 
the confidence to seek service on their own. Hence It is critical that ASHA workers engage 
with adolescents on issues of bodily changes through regular sessions and dialogue and 
they should provide support in accessing the services. 
 What are the causes of irregular menstrual cycles? 
The average duration of menstrual cycle is 28 days, however in some it may be of a 
duration of 21 days and in few it may last up to 35 days (counted from the 1st day of 
the menstruation). Under certain circumstances this can become irregular. One of the 
reasons for irregular periods are hormonal changes. When the two main hormones 
(Oestrogen and Progesterone) responsible for regulating the menstrual and ovulation 
cycle become imbalanced they impact the menstrual cycle. Such imbalances are 
common during adolescence. 

Irregular periods occur due to hormonal changes in the body. 
It cannot simply be assumed that a late or irregular period 
is due to pregnancy. Irregular periods are common during 
adolescence.
It is normal to have pain during menstrual bleeding. It is 
because the uterus squeezes to push out the lining. The 
squeezing can cause pain in the lower belly or lower back. The 
pain may begin before bleeding starts or just after it starts. 
Counsel her to relax and take it easy.If pain is unbearable refer 
to a doctor who may give some pain killer. Intake of these pain 
killers during first few days of menses does not mean that the 
girl is having a disease.

Case Study 10: Zubeida’s Dilemma
Zubeida and Shahid (both 20 
years old) were neighbours and 
knew each other for the last 
two years. They would often 
meet and go out. A few days 
ago, they decided to meet at 
Shahid’s friend’s room. This 
was the first time they were 
sharing a private space. That 
day they mutually agreed on 
having sex. That day Zubeida 
told Shahid to use a condom, 
but Shahid responded saying 
that since she was having sex 
for the first time and it’s not 
possible to get pregnant the 
first time. Moreover he didn’t know where to buy condoms from.
The next day Zubeida was anxious about getting pregnant. She had heard about the 
emergency contraception pill but did not know where or how she could access it. 
Zubeida did not want to share about her sexual relationship with anyone else but was 
very concerned. So she decided to approach Kalyani, the ASHA worker in her area. 
Kalyani said to Zubeida, “You should be Ashamed of yourself for indulging in these 
acts before marriage. 
I'm warning you if you come again, I will tell your parents about this”. Zubeida went 
back to Shahid and the next day Shahid finally got her emergency pills from a chemist 
shop. After taking the pills, Zubeida was relieved. 

Points of Discussion: 
Question 1. Shahid said that it is not possible to get pregnant during the first sexual 
intercourse. Do you think that is correct? 
Answer: No! After the commencement of menstrual periods a girl can get pregnant even 
during the first sexual encounter if it is unprotected sex because the ovulatory cycle has 
begun and the ovaries are mature enough. 
Question 2. Do you think Kalyani’s response to Zubeida was right?
Answer: Kalyani’s behaviour towards Zubeida was not right. She should not be non-
judgemental interacting with her. She should have given her informed het on safe sex and 
given her solution to her current problem and helped her prevent unintended. At the same 
time she should have discussed with her safe sex behaviours and given information and 
counselling on contraceptive methods and choices available.
Question 3. Now that Zubeida has taken the emergency pill she need not worry . Is that 
true or false?
Answer:  The emergency pill is effective if taken within 72 hours of having unprotected sex. 
Since Zubeida took the pill 2 days after having unprotected sex the risk of pregnancy is 
reduced. While providing information about the emergency pill, it is important to tell the 
person that the medication is most effective when taken soon after unprotected sex. It is 
critical to provide information about various other contraceptive methods for regular use. 

Emergency contraceptive pills are not dangerous to a woman’s 
health and have no known serious medical complications. 
There is no evidence that if a woman uses ECPs multiple times, 
it causes any health risks. They can cause minor side effects, 
such as menstrual irregularities and nausea, which typically last 
only a short time. This is because the dose of hormone is very 
small, and there is only one dose involved. These effects are not 
medically harmful. 
Women should feel free to use the emergency contraceptive pill 
whenever they think it’s necessary. Each woman should decide 
for herself whether they are acceptable for her.
The emergency contraception pill is available over the counter 
at medical stores and can be purchased by anyone. It does 
not require a special prescription and the medication comes 
with instructions. If a person conceives despite having taken 
the emergency pill, then the ASHA worker cannot be held 
responsible. The person needs to be told that the emergency 
pills reduce the chance of conception by 59 to 95% and that they 
can fail in some cases. 
Emergency contraceptive tablets are safe for adolescent girls. 
In a study carried out for the age group 13-16 years it was 
found that ECPs were safe and this age group was also able to 
use this pill with ease. Also, access to ECPs does not influence 
sexual behaviour.2,3 Infact young women may need to use these 
pills due to several reasons – like failure to use contraception 
properly, lack of agency to plan sexual intercourse, intercourse 
under pressure/force, taboos around young women and 
contraception.

 Case Study 11: Kamlesh: Addressing issues of Violence
Kamlesh is an ASHA worker in a village. While going home today she saw a group of 
girls. The girls were serious and a bit worried and were standing around Parwana who 
was crying. Kamlesh was known well to the girls and had sessions with them regarding 
several health issues. The girls liked Kamlesh as well. 
Kamlesh approached the girls to find out what was going on but all the girls became 
quiet as she came. Even Parwana became a bit conscious. When Kamlesh asked again 
she replied, “My life is destroyed didi, I just don’t know what to do?!” Kamlesh 
consoled her that perhaps she may be able to help her. As she calmed down, Parwana 
told Kamlesh that she had been in a relationship with a boy from her college. She said 
that during this time she had also had a sexual relationship with him. Her boyfriend 
had quietly taken some pictures of them getting intimate. A while ago when Parwana 
tried to tell him that she was not interested in continuing the relationship with her 
anymore, he blackmailed her saying that he would make their pictures public. 
Kamlesh told Parwana, “I am here with you. You have not done anything wrong by 
being in a relationship with someone. Infact it is the boy who has done wrong by taking 
your pictures without your consent and is now using them to blackmail you. Don’t 
worry. Let me think what we could do in this situation. Until then, please feel free to 
come to me when you need to talk.”
Kamlesh understood that this was a sensitive issue and that it was important to get 
more support to deal with it. Taking care of Parwana’s privacy, she inquired about 
organisations who work on these issues in their district and suggested to Parwana that 
she seek their help. Parwana got support from the concerned social organisation, while 
Kamlesh tracked the case closely. 
Points of discussion:
Question 1. What do you think about Parwana’s situation?
Answer:  Parwana was a victim of violence. Her boyfriend took her pictures without her 
consent and then used them to blackmail her. Any such verbal or non-verbal behaviour that 
violates the right of the other person is considered a form of violence, it could be verbal, 
mental or emotional.
Adolescents and young people have to face many such instances of violence in their life 
though it's not always a physical form of violence. Also due to societal attitudes many 
adolescents are unable to talk about their problems openly and in a safe space. Many times, 
 in such situations, young women and girls are blamed for being careless and reckless and 
held responsible for inviting the violence. This has a deep impact on their health and future 
life. 
Question 2. If you were in Kamlesh’s place, how would you help/support Parwana?
Answer:  The response to situations of violence will vary from case to case. In this particular 
situation we learnt the following: 
1. Because of the regular contact and a friendly relationship that Kamlesh had with the 
girls Parwana was able to share openly with her about her personal crisis. 
2. After listening to Parwana’s issue Kamlesh was sensitive enough to tell her that she was 
abused (victim of violence) in this situation and it was not at all her fault, so she should 
not blame herself for it. Further, she reassured Parwana that she was not alone and that 
they would find some or the other support for her to get out of this situation.
3. Further, Kamlesh’s reassurance that she would ensure that the matter remains 
confidential is a sign of right attitude by an ASHA worker. 
4. Because Kamlesh herself was not really familiar with this issue, she identified the 
correct organisation and was able to help Parwana access support from those who 
were well versed with such matters. Had she herself jumped into it without adequate 
knowledge, called the police hurriedly or delayed her response then the situation could 
have got more complicated or worsened for Parwana. Crisis involving violence can 
be very daunting and complicated and require proper strategizing. There are several 
organisations in India that work on issues of violence against women and below is a list 
of some of them.

Women Police: 1090/ 1091/ 1291 
Cyber Crime Helpline: 155260
Women’s Helpline (WCD): 181 
Jagori Helpline: 011-26692700, +91 8800996640
National Helpline on Domestic 
Violence: 181 
Nazariya Organisation 
helpline (for LGBTQIA + 
persons): +91 9818151707
Police 100 Samarthyam India (for 
persons with disabilities): +91 9711190806, +91 9810558321, 011-4101938942
Emergency Response Helpline: 112 
Saheli Helpline (Legal Aid helpline): 11-24616485
National Commission for Women: 011-26944880, 011-26944515, 011-26944890, +91 7217735372 
iCall (Mental Health Helpline run by TISS): +91 9372048501, +91 9920241248, +91 836979951343


 Role of ASHA workers in cases of violence -
In order to address the issue of violence against women in your community or to 
support survivors of violence/abuse the following points may be helpful:
1. What could you do to support someone who is a survivor of violence/abuse?
a. If someone in your community is facing violence, then it is important to reassure 
them that what is happening with them is wrong, and not their fault. Extending 
emotional support and asking the person how they would like to handle the 
situation. 
b. Give options to the survivor. For instance, counselling of the abuser or family 
members. Inform her of her rights as per the Domestic Violence Act, 2005 and also 
give the option of registering a formal complaint. 
c. Sometimes the situation takes a lot of time to turn around and for the violence 
to stop. In such a situation you could also contact any organisation working on 
violence against women and other vulnerable communities or help the survivor 
to approach such organisations to address the crisis. You could provide contacts 
from the list above or tell them about One Stop Crime Centre or District protection 
Officer etc. 
d. If the survivor needs medical attention, you could accompany them to the health 
centre.
2. For prevention of violence -
a. Organise a trauma or violence response committee in your community including 
members or representatives of the Village Health, Cleanliness and Nutrition 
Committee, Gram Panchayat, Mahila Mandal etc. 
b. Build your own knowledge and awareness about the provisions of Domestic 
Violence Act, 2005, Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2013, Protection of Children 
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
 c. Have regular meetings with adolescents in the community to raise awareness about 
forms of violence and breaking the silence around them. Ensure that you are not just 
highlighting physical forms of violence but mental, emotional, psychological and 
other forms too .
d. Keeping a track of emerging issues of violence in the community and keeping in 
touch with members of vulnerable groups like Muslims and Dalits. 
e. Spread awareness that violence is not a personal or familial issue and that there are 
laws to prevent violence and it is the role of an ASHA worker also to respond to the 
issue. 

Restricting the mobility of young women and stopping them 
from getting out of the house is a form of gender-based 
violence. By placing restrictions on their mobility, we are not 
going to address violence against them but instead stop them 
from participating in play, work and studies. It is important 
to acknowledge that abusers are not just strangers but also 
persons known to the survivor. Thus, restricting mobility is not 
a solution for gender-based violence. 
Several studies have shown that women who wear conservative 
clothing like salwar-kameez or sarees also experience 
violence. Clothes are not the reason for sexual violence. It is 
the patriarchal society and thinking that gives some men the 
thought that they have the license to abuse women. Therefore, 
this idea that women invite violence through their clothes needs 
to be challenged. It is important to stress the need for consent in 
any sexual relationship rather than blame women. 
No, domestic violence is not a personal matter. The government 
has made laws on this and providing support to a victim or 
survivor of abuse is her legal right. 

Violence is not just physical. It’s also emotional , for instance 
pressurising someone to have sex with you, verbal abuse , for 
instance, showing someone down by repeated bullying and 
nagging, economic violence , for instance, when a husband 
does not provide wife financial support for household work, 
Sexual violence , for instance touching, feeling someone 
without consent, staring, masturbating in front of someone, sex 
without consent etc are all forms of gender-based violence. It 
is important to acknowledge these various forms of violence 
and also know that you can seek support if faced with such 
violence.
To understand your role in situations of violence against women, see this booklet - 
Mobilising for Action on Violence Against Women: A Handbook for ASHA
 Part-3: Role of ASHA workers in ensuring 
participation of adolescent boys and young 
men
Why is it important to dialogue with adolescent boys and young men on sexual and 
reproductive health? How can ASHA workers help adolescent boys and young men 
access information on this? 
There may be many people in the 
community who believe that an 
ASHA worker is only supposed to 
speak to adolescent girls and young 
women. However, this is not true 
and it is important to also engage 
with young men in the community 
because of the following reasons:
• To raise awareness about 
women’s sexual and 
reproductive health issues and 
rights amongst men especially 
concerning consensual sex, 
unwanted pregnancy, and the 
impacts of these on the mental 
and physical health and well-being of women
• To encourage safer sexual behaviour and practices 
• To improve communication and respect in relationships between couples (married or 
unmarried)
• To ensure the participation of men in family planning, contraception and health of 
women during pregnancy and childbirth and child rearing 
• Providing men solutions to reproductive and sexual health problems 
• To transform the societal attitudes towards gender norms and work towards gender 
balance
Having regular monthly meetings with groups of adolescent boys to build a rapport with 
them. The following issues may be discussed in these meetings and individual counselling 
sessions:
• Providing information to adolescent boys about their sexual and reproductive 
health issues through individual counselling sessions to remove societal myths and 
misconceptions. For instance, the myths around masturbation and its impacts on male 
potency etc.
 • Engaging with young men who are abusive towards their partners through individual 
and couple counselling sessions depending on the situation. Counselling sessions 
should also address issues like consensual sex and issues around sexual pleasure. 
Talk about the existence of laws that are meant to prevent domestic violence and the 
importance of mutual respect in couple relationships.
• Talk openly about family planning and contraception in individual and group 
counselling sessions with young men and adolescents. Make them conscious about 
decisions around having children and that parents and elders in the family cannot be 
the decision makers for these. This decision lies with the partner and it is the duty of the 
male partners to provide support to the partner and ensure she can exercise her choice.
• Provide condoms or emergency contraceptive pills during one-on-one as well as group 
meetings and counselling sessions as per the need and talk about how these are used. 
Try and convince them that sexual pleasure is not reduced by using condoms and in fact 
this method ensures protected and safe sex. 
• Encourage young men to visit health centres when their partners need to go for a 
medical exam etc. If you are accompanying a young mother-to-be to a health centre for 
pre-natal check-ups encourage the partner to also join as well as continue accompanying 
her for future visits.
• Respond to curiosity and questions about sex during counselling sessions. Remember 
that not having access to proper information about sex leads them to obtaining this from 
unreliable sources.
• Talk about encouraging them to support in household chores, taking care of children 
and health of their partners and supporting their life choices and the opportunities they 
get to move towards changing established gender roles and norms. 
• To provide advice on issues such as attitudes on gender norms, GBV.
• ASHA can engage with men for the following purposes: 
a. To encourage couple communication 
b. To encourage men to accompany women to facilities and child care
c. To encourage men to procure SRH products (condom, oral pills, pregnancy test kits  
    etc.)
d. To facilitate services for men needs like STI/HIV, contraceptives
e. To provide counselling for sexual dysfunction, masturbation etc.47
