Mobilizing for Action on  Violence Against Women: A Hand book for ASHA

Violence Against Women is Visible in 


Violence against women can be:
Physical Violence: Slapping, fractures, cuts, bites, pulling hair, beating, punching, 
kicking or causing injuries with or without weapon, acid attacks,  
strangling  and pregnancy complications due to abuse;
Sexual Violence: Sexual assaults like rape or attempt to rape, forced sexual encounters, 
eve teasing, molestation, stalking, sexual trafficking, forced and/
or child marriage, sexual harassment at workplace, denying use of 
contraceptives, sexual advances from other family members, child sexual abuse, forced and painful sex, withholding sex;
Economic Violence: Denial of rights to inherit property and access to money, deprivation from food, clothing, education and health care, not allowing women to work, aggressively demanding expalnations for expenditures, dowry demands, unpaid domestic labour or harassment by those 
who are powerful or in positions of power;
Emotional Violence: Neglect, mental trauma, threats to cause harm or kill, isolation, 
verbal abuse, suspicion, denying paternity of the child, insulting 
woman in public or private, and fault finding in every activity etc.;
Some acts of violence like physical or sexual abuse are obvious and visible in society while 
acts of emotional and economic violence are often not even perceived as violence. 
In your village and surrounding community, there are instances of violence happening 
every day against women. Violence against women spans across different stages of life starting from as early as before the birth of a girl child and extending till old age. You would have heard of cases of elimination of the foetus (unborn child) because it is a 
female. 
Neglect of the girl child is common and is visible in 
various forms such as- depriving them of breast milk, 
giving them less food than their brothers or feeding 
them after the boys in the family, not taking them to hospitals in case of illnesses, not allowing them to go to school and getting young girls married before they 
attain the legal age for marriage i.e, 1 8 years etc. 
You would have also seen women being teased, 
molested or heard of sexual assaults on women and 
,acid attacks on women. Sexual violence can also 
happen to children (girls and boys) from newborn through adolescence.
Other instances of violence include harassment for dowry, crimes committed to preserve the honour of a family or clan or community (killing 
or sexually assaulting the young couple if they 
chose to marry against societal/family norms), women facing intimidation and harassment at the 
workplace, or in schools or in public places. 
It is not only girls and young women who face 
violence. Older women are also often victims of violence, and are often neglected, not provided 
with health care or nutritious food or are made to do menial work or are even abandoned. 
Domestic Violence is one of the most common forms of 
violence against women. It is inflicted by the husband or 
other close family members. Domestic violence includes all the above mentioned categories of violence i.e, 
physical, emotional, economic and sexual. Any sexual 
assault including rape committed by the husband or any other family member should also be considered as sexual violence against the woman. This type of violence is 
frequently invisible since it happens behind closed doors 
and often the community does not treat it as a type of violence but considers it as a “private family matter”, and accepts it as a normal part of life. 
Often women who are abused are reluctant to seek help because of feelings of shame and 
guilt, fear of being blamed, no economic independence, no confidence that the organizations can help them , (as a result of negative experiences), fear of consequences, 
protecting the family’s reputation, or thinking it won’ t happen again. One big reason women 
endure violence is that there are no alternatives. Raising her voice often leads to the woman 
being thrown out of her marital family and she is often not supported by her natal family. This fear often prevents women from speaking out. A woman living alone, or with her natal family is also not accepted in the society. 
Violence against women leads to various physical, mental and social consequences. It results 
in women being denied their rights and entitlements, makes for low representation in public/ 
political spaces, denial in positions, of decision making and even restricts their access to 
schools, health facilities and employment. 
As an ASHA you are close to the women of your community and already share a rapport 
with them, which makes it easier for you to identify who is at risk or who is facing such forms of violence. This handbook will help you learn how to identify, intervene and address issues 
of violence against women in your community.
This handbook deals with only violence against women, but this does not mean that there is 
no violence against men. In fact older men often face the same forms of violence that older 
women face. The forms, manifestations and consequences are different for men and are not 
included in this handbook.

Different Forms at  
Different Stages Throughout the Lifecycle of Women 
Prenatal: Sex selective elimination; 
Infancy: Depriving new born girls of breast milk, giving inadequate 
and poor quality 
food, overall 
neglect of care, not seeking health care at the time of illness and 
sometimes killing baby girls;
Childhood: Not providing adequate nutrition or unequal food provision, compared to boys in the family, depriving them of health care, denial of access to life skills education programme and recreational activities, forced childhood marriages, sexual abuse, and trafficking for abuse and labour;
Adolescence: Eve teasing, molestation, rape, sexual harassment, trafficking, kidnapping, forced prostitution, early marriages, denial of education and life skill opportunities, limited exposure for self development, honour killing, sexual harassment either online or through mobiles, cell phones etc;
Adult: Verbal abuse, physical violence, repeated 
fault finding, compelling women to engage in humiliating acts often in public, blaming and shaming for giving birth to a girl child, forced abortions, acid attacks, denial of opportunities, limiting access to financial resources, property rights, denied access to health care, restricting movements, rape in marriage or otherwise, dowry related harassment, sexual harassment at work place sexual harassment either online or through mobiles, cell phones etc.;
Old Age: Stigma of widowhood, neglect, lack of access to care, nutrition, health care and financial resources, abandoned by families; 

It is important to be conscious of the fact that all women are vulnerable to violence. Violence 
against women is not always visible. You also need to understand that violence can progress 
from verbal to physical abuse. By being alert to certain -signs and symptoms, types of 
behaviour and life situations you can identify women at risk or those who may possibly be suffering from violence.

2.  WhICh Women are Vulnerable to VIolenCe?
You should be aware that while violence can happen to any woman, some women are particularly vulnerable. They are: 
Women living in poverty
Orphaned girls or girls with a single parent
Female headed households where the father or husband, is missing or dead
Women with alcoholic husbands are also more prone to violence.
Destitute women
Old women or those suffering from illness
Women with disability or those having disabled children
Women from marginalized or minority communities
Sex workers
Women identifying as part of a sexual minority for example-lesbian or bisexual
Women residing in state run institutions or shelter homes
 Women in post disaster and conflict situations - Young girls or women are at higher 
risk of sexual exploitation and trafficking in disaster situations (floods, earthquakes, 
cyclone, tsunami etc) and conflict situations (riots, family disputes and war, terrorist and 
insurgency attacks). The vulnerability is higher if they have lost their parents, guardians, 
or other family members.

3. What symptoms and sIgns should alert you?
Violence against women can have physical or mental manifestations or affect the woman’s reproductive health. When describing their symptoms women may not explicitly tell 
you that they have encountered abuse. During your home visit you may notice that 
women may repeatedly complain about the signs mentioned below, especially in the case of sexual violence, but may not share the truth about sexual violence. You will notice that often there is a delay between the time of injury and treatment seeking. You 
should be sensitive to the fact that women suffering from the symptoms and signs listed 
below could actually be suffering from abuse. Be sure to be sensitive while eliciting the 
history. 
- Bruises on the body, especially around eyes and face, hit marks on ears (leading to 
difficulty in hearing), loose or broken teeth. 
 - Vague complaints persisting over a long time with no obvious physical cause.  
This may include unspecified complains of pains, numbness, or pain in lower 
abdomen.
- Unexplained, spontaneous abortion in pregnant women
- Attempted suicide or suicidal thoughts
- Anxiety, fear, depression, self- destructive behaviour
- Sleeping problems

Complaints that should lead you to the suspicion of sexual 
violence (the ones listed above and the following)
- Longstanding lower abdominal pain. 
- Signs and symptoms of Urinary Tract infection such as the need to pass urine more 
often, pain or burning feeling while passing urine, fever with chills, and cloudy 
urine.
- Signs and symptoms of Sexually Transmitted Infections such as- vaginal itching, 
abnormal discharge, lower abdomen pain, rash, swelling in the groin or sore in 
genital area.
- Sexually transmitted infection in young children or young girls. 
Pregnancy in unmarried girls under 18 years of age. 

ConsequenCes oF VIolenCe agaInst Women
Violence against Women can have serious consequences on their physical and mental health. 
These can be classified as:
 Physical: Injuries ranging from minor cuts to bruises; burns, 
chronic pain, and malnutrition in the girl child. Severe violence 
may cause fractures, leading to disability and sometimes even 
death.
 Psychological or Mental: The psychological and 
emotional effects of Violence against women are far 
more damaging than the physical ones. They hamper 
a women’s self –esteem, leading to other mental health problems and may lead to women actually committing suicide or attempts to commit suicide. This can also lead 
to depression, anxiety and headaches. Adolescent girls’ 
and adult women’s reproductive health is affected by sexual coercion.
  
Battered women syndrome:  These can be seen in women who are survivors of long 
term abuse.
 Reproductive: Unwanted pregnancies, and or sexually transmitted diseases are a 
common manifestation. Other effects include injuries to the reproductive tract, trauma 
during pregnancy leading to complications, such as abortions, premature births and 
even maternal deaths. 
 Consequences on children:  Children who see their mother abused can often become 
angry or aggressive or they may become quiet and withdraw to escape notice. Children 
in abusive families often do not eat well, grow and learn 
slowly than other children and may suffer from mental illnesses. This often leads to unexplained absenteeism or drop out from school and affects their performance. Such 
children may often run away from their homes, engage 
in addition seeking behaviour and develop suicidal tendencies. Also when a woman is abused at home, her children believe that this is the way girls and women are 
to be treated and that violence is acceptable. 

role oF an asha In addressIng VIolenCe agaInst 
Women 
Your role in addressing violence against women is two fold:
A.  Preventing violence: by increasing awareness and mobilizing community against any 
act of violence against women
B.  Addressing violence: Attending to the individual women who has suffered from violence. 

a. preventing violence - role of asha at the Community level:
1.  Build solidarity: Violence against women is a reflection of deep rooted socio-cultural 
biases, and needs sustained, long term awareness raising and mobilisation of the 
community. It is difficult for you as an individual , acting alone to address the issue of 
violence against women. 
  You need to build partnerships with other community based groups such as Village Health Sanitation and 
Nutrition Committees (VHSNC), Gram Panchayat or 
other village level social support groups working for women such as-Mahila Mandals, women self-help groups, Mahila Swasthya Sanghas or Mahila Panchayats. You can also form a group of ASHAs 
working under the same PHC area to generate 
support for taking action on violence. To enable this you can use the forum of monthly PHC review meetings. During these meetings you will be able to hold discussion on issues of violence with the group of ASHAs and also build solidarity. Sometimes women facing violence need urgent support. You should coordinate with these groups who could help in providing an informal support and shelter for women 
facing violence. These groups can also dialogue on a broader platform to address the key 
problem that has led to violence and resolve other issues of violence at the village level. 
  Ensure discussion on the issue of violence against women with other important stakeholders such as- representatives of Panchayat, women’s groups, local community 
leaders, parents of girl children. Building solidarity with groups that have the participation 
and voice of women at village level meetings will make the issue of violence against women more prominent and visible.
  Violence against women is also common in situations of family rivalries and in religious 
or caste based conflicts. Women are generally viewed as property or posession and 
are often the first ones to be attacked. In these cases you should overcome your own internal barriers of being associated with a particular group and strive hard, making special efforts to reach out to such women.

2.  Educate the community and increase awareness: Building awareness and mobilizing 
your community to prevent violence against women should form a part of your core 
activities. You should organize meetings with adolescents and women in your village to 
discuss this issue. You can do this by-
- Dispelling beliefs such as- “beating is a form of expressing love; being abused is 
alright for me; a woman cannot live without 
her partner even if he abuses her; it’s a woman’s fault that she faced rape or a girl a should be married off early as it prevents her from getting sexually abused."
- Educating adolescent girls and women during their monthly meetings on violence issues and 
enabling them to share any experience so that action can be taken.
- Raising awareness on various legal provisions or Acts that prohibit domestic 
violence, sexual harassment etc (Annexure 1)
- Using the VHSNC to organize mobilizational campaigns around dowry related 
abuse, pre-birth elimination of female foetus, girl child infanticide, early childhood 
marriages, registration of marriage, giving inheritance to girls, honour killings, trafficking of girls, and girl child discrimination.
- Disseminating information to the community members on various welfare schemes 
of the government to promote social and economic empowerment of girls and 
women. Some of these include- schemes providing education and financial assistance for girl children, SABLA scheme, Mahila Samakhya, pension for widow, unmarried and destitute women etc. (Your facilitators will provide information on 
specific schemes that have been implemented in your state). 

b. addressing individual cases of violence:
1.  Be alert to the issue: You can find out if a woman is at risk or facing violence by being 
alert and looking for clues that will help you in identifying such women. For example: a husband who displays controlling behaviour, or is unwilling to leave the woman’s side when you are talking to her, should alert you to the possibility of abuse. Look for the presence of injuries that do not match the explanation of how they occurred. 
  If you have identified a woman at risk of violence or being subjected to violence even if she has not reported it, you need to obtain more details regarding the violence. Any action you take should be discussed with the woman, otherwise she will be put at increasing risk. If the woman is not yet ready to speak out, then provide her with emotional support until she is.
You should distinguish between severe forms of violence where the woman is in need of 
urgent interventions, from less severe forms of violence which are no less damaging but 
do not have life threatening consequences. 
What will you do when you are confronted with a severe case of violence: Shift the 
woman to safe place immediately. When you come across violence directly in front 
of you or there is a situation where the violence can be a threat to a woman’s life. Take 
immediate action. You should immediately find a family member or another member of 
the community (whom you trust) to remove the woman from the source of violence. If required you can seek police protection. You can seek shelter for the woman in shelter or 
short stay homes available in the area or contact other NGOs who provide support and 
services to help the woman in distress. 
2.  Ask questions.  Questions should always be asked privately and in a non-judgemental 
manner. Direct questioning on violence may not give you an answer. Build the trust of the woman and reassure her that the information she shares will be kept confidential. Remember that asking questions in front of her family members or partner can put her in danger. 
3.  Enable access to health services: You should assess if 
the woman is suffering from any physical injury or mental 
trauma. Provide first aid for minor injuries but if you 
notice other serious effects refer her to an appropriate health care facility and escort her if necessary and ensure follow up.
4.  Provide emotional support: As an ASHA you can 
become her primary confidante and help by making the woman break silence and share her feelings about the experience of violence. Talk to her and help her overcome the feelings of shame, fear, anger and depression. Reassure 
that abuse is not her fault. 
5.  Take measures for the woman’s safety: Explain to the woman that she should try and 
anticipate situations when violence is likely to occur and seek a safe haven for herself and her children.

In situations where the woman is determined to leave the abusive individual, you 
should with the help of community/VHSNC help her in identifying a safe space like her 
maternal home, a friend or relative’s house where she can be temporarily located until 
the situation is resolved. In some districts, government or NGO run centres are also functioning to support women in distress. You can support the woman in seeking shelter at these centres if support from family and friends is not available  
  When the woman leaves try to make sure that she carries all the important documents such as-identity card, bank pass book, ration card, her and the children’s birth certificate, 
marriage registration or proof, educational certificates, health related records, assets or 
jewellery on her name, etc. 
  It is important to confront the perpetrator of violence so that there is no repetition of such violence episodes and raise awarenss about the legal provisions avialble for women 
under the law. You can do this with the support of ANM, AWW, or other members of 
your community, including the VHSNC and women’s groups and Gram Panchayat
6.  Inform the woman on legal recourse:  You should also 
share information with the woman regarding places 
or persons to contact in case she wants to report the 
violence and seek action for the violence faced. Most districts in the country have a Women’s Police Station. 
She could also contact functionaries of the Women and 
Child Department (AWW, ICDS supervisors, CDPOs). These persons will forward her complaint to the concerned “Protection Officer” of the WCD. This officer 
has been authorized by the government to take action 
on violence against women, and there is a toll free number to reach this officer. You can provide her with details of Legal Aid Centres existing in court at the district level and provide guidance on 
seeking legal assistance. 
7 .  Accessing other resources for assistance: To 
facilitate action on violence you should have the telephone numbers of Police, support organizations and media personnel- such as newspaper/magazine 
reporters, radio and TV journalists. Media is an 
important medium to build social pressure to take action on violence. 

What to do in cases of rape
Take the following additional steps in the case of a 
woman who has been raped:
 - Immediately after the sexual assault, the most 
important thing for the victim is to get to a safe 
place. This could be the victim’s home, a friend’s 
home or with a family member
 - Be supportive and reassure her that it is not her 
fault. Treat her with kindness and understanding. 
 - Find out from her if she could identify the person who raped her,the circumstances 
under which it happened and the extent of her injuries. 
 - It is vital for the woman to receive medical attention, and strongly recommended 
for her to receive a forensic examination. You should also accompany the woman to 
the healthcare facility.
 - Preserving the evidence (biological material left 
on the victim’s body) is important to identify the 
perpetrator in a sexual assault case, especially 
those in which the offender is a stranger. Thus the 
woman should not bathe or clean up before the 
examination. 
 - Support the woman and family members in 
seeking help from police and enable them to 
contact other organizations working in the community to support the woman who 
has been raped. 
 - Even if the victim has not yet decided to report the crime, receiving a forensic 
medical exam and keeping the evidence safe will improve the chances that the 
police can access and test the evidence later.
 - Give her emergency contraceptive pills to prevent pregnancy. Immediate 
hospitalization is needed if injuries are severe. 
 - Help the woman tell her family members in case she has not already told. Remember 
that family members also need to overcome their feelings about rape.
 - Tell the woman and family members that although the incident is devastating, one 
must try and move on, and that this incident is not the end of everything. 
 - The woman may need special psychological counselling and should be supported 
for referral to a district hospital. 

hoW to keep yourselF saFe 
Like any other woman you can also be 
subjected to violence within your home 
or outside. It is possible that you go on 
tolerating violence and are not able to overcome your apprehension sufficiently. The situation is compounded by the fact 
that even though you are empowered 
to take action for violence against other women, you may be hesitant to acknowledge to yourself or to others that 
you are being abused. Remember that you 
should help yourself before you begin to help others. Being able to articulate your 
own problems will instil empathy and help 
you to support other women better, given your own experience. 
Remember that violence against women is a manifestation of power. It is often individuals 
in positions of power who engage in inflicting abuse on women. There is a chance 
that because of your involvement in mobilizing against the issue and helping women 
who encounter violence, may make you vulnerable to harassment and even abuse by dominant, powerful individuals in the community. You should always be conscious of this and actively seek the support of other individuals such as the elders in your village 
and members of the VHSNC. Make sure that it is well known in the community that you 
have linkages and connections amongst respected elders, police and the health care system. Also practise safety measures such as avoiding walking alone, staying away from isolated places, moving in groups after dark, etc.

Legal measures to prevent violence against women:

What is third party reporting? A third party with knowledge of offence committed can report it individually or in a group.

1. Name of the law: Pre-Conception, 
Prenatal Diagnostic Techniques Act
(The Act provides for the prohibition of sex selection, before or after 
conception).  
Offence: 
- Trying to find out whether the baby is a boy or a girl using techniques such as ultrasound and amniocentesis.  
- Any laboratory or centre or clinic   
conducting any test to see if the 
baby is a boy or a girl. 
- Anybody letting the pregnant   
woman or her relatives know 
whether the baby is a boy or girl in any way. 
- Any person advertising sex-  
selection clinic facilities in any way. 
- Any clinic using this kind of   
technology which is not registered 
by appropriate authority. 
- Clients and their relatives asking the   
sex of the baby.
- There is no written consent from   
the woman to undergo test in 
prescribed form & its copy not 
given to her; 
Third party reporting: yes
Punishment:
- For any professional or   
client who violates the 
Act: Imprisonment for 
up to three years and a fine of Rs. 50,000.   
- For clients who commit   
further offences under 
the Act: Imprisonment up to five years and a fine of Rs. One lakh. 
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: No

 
2. Name of the law: Protection of 
Women from Domestic 
Violence Act
(Applies to 
every woman or a child who has been 
in domestic 
relationship with the abuser.)
Offence: 
Domestic violence includes actual   
abuse or the threat of abuse that is 
physical, sexual, verbal, emotional 
and economic.
Punishment:
- Up to one year’s   
imprisonment and/
or maximum fine of Rs 
20,000.
Important points - 
- Under this act a women   
can raise voice against 
violence, file DIR 
(Domestic Incidence 
Report) with “Protec-tion Officer”; FIR to 
police or go straight to 
a magistrate. 
- Under this act a woman   
is entitled to protection 
order, custody order, monetary relief, right 
to secure housing, 
shelter homes, medical facilities. 
- A police officer, Protec-  
tion Officer, service 
provider or Magistrate who has received a complaint of domestic violence or is otherwise present at the place of an incident of domestic 
violence or when the 
incident of domestic violence is reported to him, shall inform the af-
fected woman about all 
the relief and her right to orders mentioned above. 
Can police arrest immediately?:  Arrest,   
only if the 
problem action (eg beating 
or dowry 
cruelty) requires arrest 
under a 
different law, say the Indian Penal 
Code. 

3. Name of the law: Dowry 
Prohibition Act (Prohibits the request, payment and acceptance of dowry) 
Offence: 
Taking, giving or demanding dowry 
Third party reporting: Yes
Punishment:
- For taking or giving dowry - Imprison-ment for a minimum of five years and a fine of Rs.15,000 or the 
amount of the dowry, 
whichever is more.     
- For demanding dowry - Imprisonment of six months to two years, and a fine of Rs. 10,000.
Can police arrest immediately?: No 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: No

4. Name of the law: Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 
Offence: 
Child Marriage is marriage between two persons in which at least one is a child.
Third party reporting: Yes
Punishment:
- Any male over 18 years   
of age who marries a 
minor or anyone who directs or conducts a child marriage ceremony can be punished with up to two years of imprisonment or a fine.
Important points –
- Boys and girls forced   
into child marriages 
as minors have the option of voiding their marriage up to two 
years after reaching 
adulthood, and in certain circumstances, marriages of minors can be null and void before they reach adulthood.   
- All valuables, money,   
and gifts must be 
returned if the marriage is nullified, and the girl must be provided with a place to stay until she marries or becomes an adult 
- Children born from   
child marriages are con-
sidered legitimate, and the courts are expected 
to give parental custody 
with the children’s best 
interests in mind.
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: No


5a. Name of the law: IPC 1860 Acid Attack 
Section 326 A and B
Offence: 
Attempting to or throwing/
administering acid whether or not it 
leads to injury. 
Third party reporting: Yes
Punishment:
- Imprisonment of at least   
10 years, which may 
extend to a life term. 
A just and reasonable 
fine to meet the 
medical expenses, and 
compensation for the 
victim. 
- For Attempted Acid   
Attack: Imprisonment 
for at least five years, 
and up to seven years. 
The attacker will also be 
liable to pay a fine. 
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: No

5b. Name of the law: IPC 1860 Sexual 
harassment 
Sec 354
Sec 354 A Sec 509
Offence: 
i)  Physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures or 
ii)  a demand of request for sexual favours or
iii) making sexually coloured remarks or
iv) forcibly showing pornography or
v)  any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-verbal conduct of sexual nature.
(Also applies to sexual harassment 
online, via phone  or letters/ photos)
Third party reporting: Yes
Punishment:
Rigorous imprisonment up 
to five years, or with fine, or with both in case of offence 
described in clauses (i) & 
(ii) Imprisonment up to one year, or with fine, or with both in other cases.
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: Yes except when the woman is touched with sexual intent, or assault or criminal 
force is used on 
a woman with sexual intent.

5c. Name of the law: IPC 1860 Disrobing Sec 354 B
Offence: 
Forcing a woman or helping somebody 
to force a woman to take off her clothes. 
Third party reporting: Yes
Punishment:
Yes Imprisonment for a minimum of three years and a maximum of seven years, and a fine.  
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: No

5d. Name of the law: IPC 1860 Voyeurism Sec 354 C
Offence: 
Watching or recording a woman in private, including when she is expecting not to be seen. This includes when the woman's breasts, genitals and buttocks are exposed, or when she is only 
wearing underwear. This also includes 
when she is using the toilet or having sex in private.
Third party reporting: Yes
Punishment:
Imprisonment for at least a year for the first offence, which may extend to three years. For second or subsequent offences, a 
minimum of three years of 
imprisonment which could extend to seven years. Offender is liable to pay a fine in all cases.
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: Yes, in first   
conviction.  No, in second   
or subsequent convic-
tions against 
the offender

5e. Name of the law: IPC 1860 Stalking Sec 354 D
Offence: 
To follow a woman and to repeatedly 
contact her despite her making it clear 
that she does not want to be contacted. 
This includes following the woman using 
the internet, email, phone and other 
kinds of electronic communication. 
(including stalking on the internet 
and via cell phone/ mobiles)
Third party reporting: Yes
Punishment:
Imprisonment for at least 
one year which may extend 
to three years, and a fine. 
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: Yes, in first   
conviction.  No, in second   
or subsequent convic-
tions against 
the offender

5f. Name of the law: Trafficking  
Sec 370(1) and 370A
Offence: 
Using force, threats, abduction, deception and other means to kidnap, transport, receive and harbour a woman or child with the intention of exploiting them.
Third party reporting: Yes
Punishment:
- Imprisonment from   
seven to ten years 
which may extend to life, with a fine.  
- For multiple offenders   
and public servants who 
commit this offence, life imprisonment.  
- Exploitation of a traf-  
ficked woman or child 
can be punished by three to five years of imprisonment which 
can extend to five to 
seven years, with a fine.  
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: No


5g. Name of the law: Rape Sec 376
Offence: 
Penetrating a woman's mouth, vagina, anus, urethra with one’s mouth, penis or any object without her consent and against her will.
Third party reporting: Yes, except in case of  sexual  intercourse by husband upon 
his wife during 
separation 
-where victim has to be the complainant.
Punishment:
- Rigorous imprisonment   
from seven to ten years, 
which may extend to life, and a fine. 
- In cases of gang rape,   
or if rape causes 
death or a persistent vegetative state, then the punishment is 
rigorous imprisonment 
for twenty years, which 
may extend to life.   
- Repeat offenders are to   
be punished with life 
imprisonment.  
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: No for all cases, 
except in case of  sexual  intercourse by 
husband upon 
his wife during 
separation.

5h. Name of the law: Mental or 
physical cruelty by 
husband or his 
relativeSec 498 A
Offence: 
i) That leads to suicide or 
ii) Causes serious injury to the woman or 
iii) includes demands for dowry
Third party reporting: In case of dowry 
demand or 
mental/physical 
cruelty that leads to injury a relative or 
public servant 
notified by State Government can complain
Punishment:
Prison term for three years 
and fine
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: No , in case of dowry demand or 
mental / physical cruelty that leads to injury

5i. Name of the law: Public servant disobeying under law Sec 166
Punishment:
Imprisonment for minimum 6 months which may extend to 2 years and fine
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: Yes


5j. Name of the law: Non treatment 
of victim by 
hospital Sec 166
Punishment:
Imprisonment for 1 year or fine or both
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: Yes

6. Name of the law: Protection of Children 
from Sexual 
Offences, 2012 (Protection of any person 
under age 18 
from sexual abuse)
Offence: 
Defined as: 
i.  penetrative and aggravated 
penetrative sexual assault
ii. sexual and aggravated sexual assault
iii. sexual harassment
iv.  using a child for pornographic purposes
Attempting to commit or helping someone else to commit the above acts are also punishable. 
If any person thinks an offence might 
happen or knows that it has happened 
has to report it. 
The police have to register an FIR in all 
cases of child abuse. 
Third party reporting:  Any person who knows a sexual 
crime is being 
committed or may be committed against a child 
must report it.  
Police must act 
when the third party reports 
the crime for a 
case in which punishment is more than three years of 
imprisonment. 
Punshiment:
- F   ailure to report is 
punishable by up to six months in jail, a fine, or 
both. 
- Punishment for   
the offences is 
imprisonment for at 
least seven to ten years 
which can last for life, and a fine.  
- Sexual harassment of   
children carries a prison 
term of at least three 
years.
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: Yes, when the punishment is less 
than three years 
of imprisonment
No, when  the 
punishment 
is more than 
three years of imprisonment.

7. Name of the law: Other sections 
under IPC
Offence: 
- Causing miscarriage without woman’s consent(IPC 31 3) 
- Assault or criminal force to a woman with intent to outrage her modesty(IPC 342)
- Threatening to injure a person’s reputation or property or to cause harm(IPC 503)
- Wrongful confinement.-- Whoever wrongfully restrains any person in such a manner as 
to prevent that person from proceeding beyond certain circumscribing limits, is said" 
wrongfully to confine" that person. Illustrations
(a) A causes Z to go within a walled space, and locks Z. Z is thus prevented from 
proceeding in any direction beyond the circumscribing line of wall. A wrongfully confines z. (b) A places men with firearms at the outlets of a building, and tells Z that they will fire at Z if Z attempts leave the building. A wrongfully confines Z. Section 340 
IPC 

8. Name of the law: Section 46 -Sub section 4
Offence: 
Save in exceptional circumstances no woman shall be arrested after sunset and before sunrise. And where such exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police officer shall by making a written report, obtain the prior permission of the judicial magistrate of 
first class within whose local jurisdiction the offence is committed or the arrest is to be 
made.

9. Name of the law: Zero FIR
Offence: 
- Police shall register an FIR upon receipt of information of the commission of a   
cognizable offence (see above). If it seems that the crime was committed outside 
the police station's jurisdiction, "Zero FIR" must be registered.    
- If after registration of FIR, upon investigation, it is found that the subject matter   
relates to the jurisdiction of some other police station, the FIR may be transferred 
to the police station in which the case falls.   
- Police registering Zero FIR must transfer it to the concerned police station under   
section 1 70 of the Cr.P.C.  
- Delay over the determination of the jurisdiction leads to an avoidable waste of time   
which impacts on the victim and also leads to offenders getting an opportunity to 
slip away. 
- Failure to register a Zero FIR or normal FIR for a cognizable offence (see above)   
means police staff or officer can be prosecuted under section 166A of the IPC, 
especially if the crime is a sexual crime.   
- He or she can also be punished with departmental.

10. Name of the law: Medical 
Negligence –  Death caused by medical negligence, or other   negligence 
Section 304A
Offence: 
Causing death by rashness or negligence  If death is caused by doctor it must be 
gross negligence
Punishment:
Yes Prison for up to two years, or a fine, or both.
Can police arrest immediately?: Yes 
Can Police release arrested person without
judge’s order?: Yes