MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
GOVERNMENT OF INDIAMINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Book No-1Book No-1
                  
      forASHAASHAReading
MaterialS.No. Chapter Name Pages
Preface 2
Acknowledgement 4
1. National Rural Health Mission–The Vision 5
2. Introduction: The Asha Learning Programme 6
3. ASHA: My Eight Tasks 3
4. Staying Healthy 9
5. Personal Hygiene 12
6. Water Safety at Home 15
7. Disposal of Waste Water 17
8. Our Health Depends on Food We Eat! 19
9. Body Mapping and Overview of Organs 22
10. Women and Health 25
11. Organising a Group Meeting 27
12. Know Health Services 29
13. Anganwadi Centre 32
14. Village Birth Attendant or Dai 34
15. Illness and Healing 36S.No. Chapter Name Pages
16. Using Remedies 38
17. Home Remedies 40
18. Preventing Unwanted Pregnancies 43
19. Condoms: An Option for Men 45
20. Registration of Pregnant Women 46
21. Janani Suraksha Yojana 48
22. HIV and AIDS 49
23. Breast Feeding 51
24. Infant Nutrition 53
25. Immunization 55
26. Diarrhoea 57
27. Aches and Pain 60
28. TB 62
29. Snake Bite 64The National Rural Health Mission launched on 12th April 2005, seeks to
provide effective, efficient and affordable health care to rural population ineighteen states with weak public health indicators.
One of the key components of the mission is creating a band of female health
volunteers, appropriately named “Accredited Social Health Activist” (ASHA) ineach village within the identified States.  These ASHAs would act as a ‘bridge’between the rural people and health service outlets and would play a centralrole, in achieving national health and population policy goals.
ASHAs are to be selected by community, out of residents within the community.
They would work on voluntary basis, although compensation would be providedto them for specific activities and services. ASHA guidelines clearly lay downthe accountability mechanisms. The induction training for ASHA would becompleted in 23 days spread in five rounds over a period of 12 months to befollowed by periodic re-training for about two days once every alternate month.
Equipping ASHAs with knowledge and skills required to perform the assigned
roles will be crucial element in the programme. The training programme forPrefacePreface
ASHAs needs to be organised closer to communities.  A major challenge will be
to sustain the interest of selected women participating in the initialtraining programme.
This book is first in the series, to be made available during the entire training
period. Written in simple language, it can be modified, adapted and translatedby respective States as per their needs. The programme managers working inNGO settings may also like to use this book.
I take this opportunity to thank United Nations Population Fund for providing
technical assistance for development of the training materials to be used inASHA programme.
30th June 2005
Prasanna Hota
Secretary, Health & Family WelfareMinistry of Health and Family WelfareGovernment of IndiaNew Delhi4 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
The conceptualization, compilation, editing and production of the modular
books to be used for pre-deployment and also on job-training of ASHAs; hasbeen a collective effort for all. Nevertheless, the constant support and sustainedguidance at all the states of the work, has been available from Shri. PrasannaHota, Secretary, Smt. S. Jalaja, Additional Secretary, Shri. B.P. Sharma, JointSecretary and Smt. Shubhra Singh, Director of the Ministry of Health andFamily Welfare, Government of India.  I wish to convey my sincere gratitude tothem for the same.
The contribution from the Department of AYUSH towards mainstreaming
various popular remedies advocated for prevailing common ailments in Indiancommunities offers an excellent opportunity for the ASHAs to perform theirduties efficiently; deserves commendations.
Prof. N.K. Sethi, Director, National Institute of Health and Family Welfare, along
with his senior faculty colleagues immensely contributed in enhancing theeducational and technical quality of the work to the taste of ASHAs.
Dr. Shyam Astekar, Consultant and Dr. Dinesh Agarwal, Technical Adviser
(Reproductive Health), UNFPA provided substantive assistance in preparationAcknowledgementAcknowledgement
of reading material for ASHA. Mrs. Nalini Srivastava, Project Secretary,
UNFPA deserves special thanks for rendering support in organising thereading material.
Dr. Pramod Samantaray, National Consultant, has contributed immensely in
carefully going through the test, throughout the preparation of these books.
Dr. V.K. Manchanda, DDG (MH/CH) and Dr. L.S. Chauhan, DDG (TB) have
provided technical support throughout the preparation of these books.
I would also like to place on record my gratitude for the hard labour and sincere
efforts put in by my colleagues, Dr. Manoj Kumar, Assistant Commissioner (Trg.),Mrs. Mridula Das, ADG (N) and Dr. H. Bhushan, Assistant Commissioner (MH) ingetting the modules in the present shape. I gratefully acknowledge thesecretarial assistance provided by Shri Harish Rao and Shri Sachin Kumar inputting together the document. 
28th June 2005
Dr. D.C. Jain
Deputy CommissionerTraining DivisionMinistry of Health and Family WelfareGovernment of IndiaNew Delhi6 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
National Rural
Health Mission-The VisionNational RuralHealth Mission-The Vision
The National Rural Health Mission (2005-12) seeks to provide effective
health care to rural population throughout the country with specialfocus on states, which have weak public health indicators and/orweak infrastructure.
The Mission is an articulation of the commitment of the Government to raise
public spending on health from 0.9% of GDP to 2-3% of GDP.
It aims to undertake architectural correction of the health system to enable it
to effectively handle increased allocations as promised under the NationalCommon Minimum Programme and promote policies that strengthen publichealth management and service delivery in the country.
It has as its key components provision of a female health activist in each
village; a village health plan prepared through a local team headed by theHealth and Sanitation Committee of the Panchayat; strengthening of therural hospital for effective curative care and made measurable andaccountable to the community through Indian Public Health Standards
1(IPHS); and integration of vertical Health and Family Welfare Programmes
and Funds for optimal utilization of funds and infrastructure andstrengthening delivery of primary healthcare.
It seeks to revitalize local health traditions and mainstream AYUSH into the
public health system.
It aims at effective integration of health concerns with determinants of health
like sanitation & hygiene, nutrition and safe drinking water through a DistrictPlan for Health.
It seeks decentralization of programmes for district management of health.It seeks to address the inter-State and inter-district disparities, especially
among the 18 high focus states, including unmet needs for publichealth infrastructure.
It shall define time-bound goals and report publicly on their progress.It seeks to improve access of rural people, especially poor women and children,
to equitable, affordable, accountable and effective primary healthcare.2 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA Introduction: The
ASHA LearningProgrammeIntroduction: TheASHA LearningProgramme
Learning programme for ASHA is based on principles of adult learning. ASHAs
after taking up and completing this learning programme will be equipped withnecessary knowledge and skills to effectively perform the tasks and activitiesexpected from her.
You will have the learning programme completed during five exposures
spread over the entire year and is to be completed during specified 23 days.Each ASHA will receive reference material in form of books during thelearning programme. 
There are 19 themes to be covered in the 23 days learning programme. These
are listed in the chart given in next page. Each theme has some lessons. Eachlesson is complete by itself. We learn the 19 themes, lesson by lesson duringeach learning exposure. Some themes having few lessons only may not spreadover all five learning exposures. The reading material specific to each lesson andthemes has been organized in the form of books. You have in your hands bookno 1. Similarly books no. 2, 3, 4 and 5 will be available in the subsequentlearning exposures.
2Each lesson is about 2-3 pages, and can be completed in half an hour. In
each lesson, you have some knowledge bits, and some skills to learn. At theend there are some points to think about. Your facilitators will help andencourage you to find out the solutions of these issues. For skills, you willhave the opportunity of hands-on experience or demonstrations tobe organized by the facilitators. During the sessions, you can practicesome skills.
So after the first learning exposure of seven days, you will have acquired
preliminary knowledge on most themes. You are supposed to take simpleassessment after each exposure. These assessments will help in makingappropriate changes if required.
After completion of first exposure, you will be working in the village and
along with Nursedidi, the Anganwadi behen, Self Help Group (SHG)members and the male MPW worker. You will have some assignments to doin the village, like water disinfection, or attending the ANC clinic/healthday. Your facilitators will give these assignments after each exposure.You will keep record of assignments given to you and share in thenext exposure.
The book number 1 is simple enough to understand for even 4th-5th standard
educated women. As we move on to the other books, lessons will be focusedon slightly complex issues. The learning programme is participatory. You learn,and your facilitators help you to learn. You should ask questions and seeksolutions to likely problems you may anticipate during your work in the village.in your work.
Our best wishes are with you, to serve the village health care needs!4 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 5 INTRODUCTION: THE ASHA LEARNING PROGRAMME
DISTRIBUTION OF LESSONS IN THE ASHA TRAINING BOOKS AS PER THEMES
THEMES BOOK 1 BOOK 2 BOOK 3 BOOK 4 BOOK 5
Introduction, roles, tasks 1. My seven tasks Village Health Plan Escorting to a hospital Records and reports: Reporting
Births and Deaths an outbreak
Being healthy- 2. Staying Healthy Social determinants Family Health: __________ Utilization   
determinants of Health 3. Personal Hygiene of health role of Men of health
services
Water-sanitation, 4. Water safety  Sanitary latrines How to protect Smokeless Chulah Rodents: environment at home water sources health 
5. Disposal of waste in village hazards
water -/soakpit-Kgarden
Nutrition & malnutrition 6. Our Health depend Night bli ndness Iodine deficiency M alnutrition and care Food taboos
on food we eat and anemia Disorders of malnourished and food 
children fads 
FoodSanitation
Knowing ourselves- 7. Body mapping/ Body-Systems Gastro Intestinal Respiratory system Cardio-Human biology overview organs Physiology of system vascular 
Reproduction system
Community, gender, - 8. Women and Grampanchayat/ PNDT act Violence Against Rights/PRI, Rights, Health- Gramsa women
responsibilities
bha/Functions of a client
Adolescent health __________ H ealthy Adolescents: Nutritional needs of Teenage pregnancy _________
Community Resource adolescent girls
Communication 9. Or ganising a Group How to organize a Counselling __________ Village 
meeting` prabhat pheri with contact 
school children drive
Health services, Govt, 10. Know Health CHC/Rural Private doctors/RMPs Social marketing Depot Pvt, Social Mar services hospital/District holder
hospital
11. Anganwadi
Centre
12. Village Birth
Attendant
Illness, causes & 13. Illness and Immunity, Rational drugs __________ _________healing, remedies Healing
14. Using remedies
AYUSH/Herbal 15. Home remedies Some AYUSH  Some AYUSH Fertility Awareness Healing 
medicines medicines medicines wi thout
drugs 
Contraceptive Methods 16. Preventing Oral contraceptive IUDs Male sterilization Female 
Unwanted pills and ECPs sterilization
Pregnancies
17. Condoms
Preventing Unwanted __________ MTP Unsafe abortions __________ _________ 
childbirth
Contd...THEMES BOOK 1 BOOK 2 BOOK 3 BOOK 4 BOOK 5
Pregnancy, birth, post 18. Registration of ANC care Process of childbirth, C section and blood Post natal 
natal care Pregnant women danger signs transfusion care
19. Janani Suraksha
Yojana
Genital Infections and 20. HIV AIDS Discharge in women Discharges in men Infertility VCTC
HIV/AIDS
Child health 21. Breast feeding Essential Newborn Acute Respiratory Measles Worm 
care Infections infestations
22. Infant Nutrition
23. Immunization24. Diarrhea
Common medical 25. Aches and pain Wound care Multiple boils Ear problems Upper
problems respiratorytractinfections 
National Health 26. TB Malaria Leprosy National Blindness Vector 
Programmes Control Programme control
Warningsigns ofcancer
Accidents & first aid 27. Snake bite Dog bite Burns Thrasher Injury Poisoning
Heat Strokes Fractures Drowning6 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
DISTRIBUTION OF LESSONS IN THE ASHA TRAINING BOOKS AS PER THEMESASHA:
My Eight TasksASHA:My Eight Tasks
KKnnoowwiinngg  oouurr  vviillllaaggee  ppeeooppllee
Improving health status of our people is a teamwork. You require participation
of everyone—the people, the nurse, the anganwadi, the Dai, the schoolteachersand the village Panchayat. You also need the help of doctor. You will need towork with all of them so that people remain healthy.
Village people are not as rich as city people. They have to face many difficulties.
They depend on land and farming. Some of them also work as wage labourers innearby towns. In many villages, rearing cattle is a source of income. Most farmersdepend upon rains. Many work as artisans. They work hard to live their life.
Some people are too poor. They are grouped as below poverty line (BPL) as per
Government criteria. Often they come from scheduled castes, tribes and othermarginalized groups. Families belonging to BPL are eligible for special benefitsunder government schemes. A village may have different settlements fordifferent castes.
Everyone needs health care. Yet some groups of people are vulnerable to sickness.
The poor people, the women, the children and adolescents and old people needhealth care more often. Their health needs are not adequately met. They havelittle or no money. At times they have to take loans at very high interest rates to
3get admission in hospitals or to buy medicines for their kids. Your role is to
guide them to get good care in time and that is affordable.
Village people have a practical sense of solving problems with simple
resources. Thus they should be involved in village health planning to assesshealth needs and also help in selecting appropriate solutions to address thecommon problems.
Schools, fair price shops, water, electricity, seeds, fertilizers, credit, animal care,
bus/jeep, roads, employment, forest produce, common grazing grounds, post-office, haat—we need all these services in the village. Health care is just onemore. It is not isolated, but part of the whole life of the village. As ASHA, youshall do your best to help your own people in their struggle for health and sharejoys of life. People have expectations from you. In following pages, you willlearn about your specific tasks to be undertaken by you as ASHA.
VViillllaaggee  HHeeaalltthh  PPllaann
You should participate in Village health planning and help nursedidi, anganwadi
behen, and Panchayat members. This will be the foundation of all health workin the village. Village health planning helps us to select important health issuesand make a work plan to solve them. Everybody's participation is necessary.NGO workers, school teachers, representatives of self help groups will also helpin micro planning. You should ensure that marginalized population groups suchas Scheduled castes, tribes, minorities and women are adequately involved inthe planning process. When people participate in planning, they also help inoffering solutions and carrying out the tasks.
Most villages will have health and sanitation committee. The committee
members take initiative for development of village health plans. Village healthplanning needs some facilitators They bring people together, activate them tothink and plan with people, map out problems and encourage solutions.Depending on the availability some NGOs workers can provide facilitation.Teachers can also help you. You should work proactively with anganwadi behenand nurse Didi to decide on the venue and timings for the planning meeting.
Village health plans provide a framework for health related actions. Many
actions lead to health. Village planning is a community approach to solveproblems. You will learn more about it in the subsequent exposures of ourlearning programme.8 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA Example: Development of a plan for tackling sanitation problem in village
Let village teachers, Nursedidi, Anganwadi behen, artisans, Panchayat members,
NGO workers meet and form a core group. You will be one of the members ofthis group.
This group should go around village observing village sanitation and other
problems. You may involve students in village rally so as to raise awareness ofsanitation issues inform about time and venue of planning meeting. Songs andstreet plays also invite attention of people.
Then gather in a central place open to all. Draw a village map on a big paper or
a wall. Ask people to draw their house in the map. Map waste water cesspoolsin village. Discuss about problems. The village planning may take 2-3 days also.
Ask people sources of wastewater flowing in the street or in cesspools. Mark
the house with things like tamarind seeds, small stones etc. Mark houses havingfever cases. The Nursedidi, and the Anganwadi behen and MPW will check thehouses. They will discuss about malaria with villagers and talk of solutions.Think of solutions to eliminate breeding sites for mosquitoes. You can handlemore problems in the same meeting. Think of handling problem of malnutritionamongst children in your village and how such exercises can be useful.
CCoommmmuunniiccaattiioonn  ffoorr  hheeaalltthh  bbeehhaavviioouurr  cchhaannggee
Health information and communication is more important than pills and
injections. Proper information and advice help people to avoid diseases andstay healthy.
Health information is a lasting asset. Currently villagers especially poor women,
men and adolescents do not have access to information on health issues. Youcan fill this gap and act as a local resource on health issues. Availability ofinformation will trigger changes in health promoting behaviours and adoptionof healthy practices.
/square6We should select issues close to people’s hearts and needs. Attend to moreimportant problems first.
/square6See what people already know and build on existing knowledge base.
/square6Understand the problems from their viewpoint also.
/square6Share health information with them and find possible actions.9 ASHA: MY EIGHT TASKS/square6Find effective ways of how people learn to change their ways.
/square6Use any of these occasions for BCC: group discussion, personal discussion,
demonstration, village meetings, clinic contacts, exhibition, camps, SelfHelp Group (SHG) meetings, meetings of adolescents, religious gatherings,haat-bazaar days etc.
/square6Use aids for BCC: Chitrakatha, flip charts, booklets, posters, prabhat pheris,songs, models, puppet shows, street plays etc
/square6Look for innovative methods in communication. For instance, one voluntaryorganization painted all the bulls in the village with health slogans on thetraditional bail-puja day. The moving slogans stayed for weeks.
/square6Assess impact of BCC efforts. Has it changed how people think? Hasit changed the way they do things? Has it improved utilization ofhealth services?
/square6Enable people to change their behaviour such as construction of sanitarylatrines in their house.
And remember all advice is good if you can follow it in similar situations. Youwill learn more about BCC in this programme.
LLiinnkkaaggeess  wwiitthh  AAWWWW,,  TTBBAA,,  AANNMM,,  MMPPWW
During your work, you need support of other persons engaged in
health related activities.
In the village, we have Anganwadi, the Dai and some other healers. We will
learn more about them soon.
The Anganwadi Worker (AWW)
Anganwadi is for village children under six years. They get supplementaryfeeds in Anganwadi Centre (AWC). AW behen weighs children regularlyand keep growth cards. As ASHA, we can work with the AW behenand Nursedidi on child health activities, and assist her in organisingfixed monthly “Health Day”. They also provide supplementary food forPregnant women.
The Village Dai
The village Dai helps in childbirth. She conducts childbirth and attendsnewborn. She gets training and kit for clean childbirth from the Primary HealthCentre/Sub Centre (PHC/SC).10 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA Other Healers
The Village Vaid uses herbal medicines. He may have some knowledge of herbs
and some Ayurvedic remedies. Some cures may be good. Faith healers practicecures with help of mantras and mindtechniques. They are also called as“Bhopas”, “Ojhas” in some communities. People go to them for some types ofillnesses. The advise given by them may be of doubtful nature.
The Nursedidi (ANM)
The Nursedidi is very important for all our work. She works from the health subcenter. She visits 5-6 villages and hamlets in turns. Her work includes:immunization, care of mother and child, childbirth, contraceptive services,some medical aid etc.
The Swasthya Karmi (Male worker)
He also helps the Nursedidi in her work. He gives fever treatment, medicinefor TB and Malaria. He also helps in controlling outbreak of diseases inthe village.
CCoouunnsseelliinngg
People often need help to find solutions to their health problems. Here are some
health related issues you can offer help.
/square6Adolescent health
/square6Pregnancy and childbirth
/square6Abortion,
/square6Childlessness
/square6Child Health and nutrition
/square6Immunization
/square6Unmet needs of contraception
/square6Intimate problems like sexually transmitted infections/AIDS.
/square6Chronic ailments like cancers, TB, leprosy,
/square6Choosing simple health care options
Yes, you may not know these problems fully. But you can certainly helppeople where to go. You may also explain them as what kinds of solutions areavailable in a given situation. You may also follow up with them and find outhow they are using the help. If there are any problems, you can suggestalternative ways.11 ASHA: MY EIGHT TASKSCounseling needs knowledge of the subject. Knowledge grows with time and
more reading and discussing. Counseling also needs skills about talking withdifferent persons—men and women, young and old etc., understanding theirviewpoints. It calls for sensitivity and empathy.
Counseling also needs motivating skills. Different problems involve different
solutions. Therefore motivating becomes necessary. We often do it in thefamily. This is how we arrive at a decision after weighing pros and cons ofseveral alternatives.
You can also do effective counseling after some experience.
EEssccoorrttiinngg  ppaattiieennttss  ttoo  aa  hhoossppiittaall
Many people need to go to a town or city hospital for higher care. They feel lost
and helpless in such situations. Often, they face difficulties in such situations.Also somebody from the family has to stay back to look after children andcattle, getting money, farm work etc. They often need you to accompany them.
You can ensure that needy people get the right help. You also can help in
deciding to go at the PHC, Community Health Centre (CHC) or the districthospital. If the CHC is far away, people may choose to go to other suitableprivate or trust hospital. In some emergency situations (like bleeding during orimmediately after birth) time is precious. Situations that need escorting are:
/square6Childbirth and immediately after childbirth, difficulties during pregnancyand childbirth.
/square6Abortion and bleeding
/square6A seriously sick child
/square6A very sick person, like brain malaria. Heat stroke
/square6Someone wants to know about his/her TB or suspect HIV
/square6Accidents like snake bite, burns, serious injury, poisoning, drowning
/square6Clients for accepting IUD or sterilization.
You need to have necessary information and skills.
Knowledge about which hospital to take to. What is the distance?
Help family in decision-making. You need to decide with the family about
where to go.12 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA Arranging transport with help of the villagers
Sending message to the hospital. (Learn to use a telephone if available).Escorting helpsGood and timely first aid and escorting can save lives and reduce harm. It also
improves your relation with the families and enhances your credibility invillage. This will make your linkages with the hospital.
PPrriimmaarryy  mmeeddiiccaall  ccaarree
People need curative care for many health problems. We have to offer
relevant, effective primary medical care to the needy. Good primary medicalcare helps to:
/square6Save time and money for families
/square6Reduce possible damage to health and life threatening complications
/square6Make easy many of your health tasks in the village people value your service
Your role is:
/square6Treat all simple illnesses (like coughs and colds) with simple cures. Manyhealth problems are simple in nature.
/square6Help in moderate illnesses (like diarrhea) and watch for early signs ofdangers and refer if necessary.
/square6Facilitate early detection of early serious chronic illness (like TB and cancer)and refer. This is great help you can do.
/square6Ensure proper first aid in accidents before referral/escorting.
/square6Depot holder for common health care commodities
However you should be careful for:
/square6Do only what you know surely. Ask for help when necessary
/square6Use only medicines and care advised in this programme
/square6Do not wait for cure for more than 2 days in any illness you are not sure of.
/square6Explain side effects of drugs you use.
/square6Explain possible risks in some illnesses (like childhood ARI).
/square6Keep drug stocks ready and safe, away from reach of children.13 ASHA: MY EIGHT TASKSAAcctt  aass  DDeeppoott  HHoollddeerrss
She will also act as deport holder for essential provisions being made available
to every habitation like oral rehydration solution (ORS), Iron Folic Acid (IFA)tablets, Chloroquine, Dispozale Delivery kits (DDK), oral pills and condoms etc.A drug kit will be provided to you. Contents of the kits will be based on therecommendations of the expert/technical advisory group set up by theGovernment of India include both AYUSG and Allopathic formulations.
RReeccoorrddss  aanndd  rreeggiissttrraattiioonn
/square6Register every birth/still birth with the gram Panchayat within 14 days.
/square6Register every death with the gram Panchayat in 7 days.
/square6Keep record of your work in ASHA register/diary.
/square6Keep a diary for noting your experiences, difficulties and thoughts.
/square6Tally your records with records at Anganwadi and sub center and meetings.
If you notice that number of girls borne in your village is much less than boys,
be alert as it may be due to the “Sex Selective Abortions”. You will learn lateras what will be your role in preventing sex selection of fetus.
In case of unusual occurrence of any disease in your village, you need to inform
concerned health authority i.e. In charge of local PHC.14 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA Staying HealthyStaying Healthy
AA  ssaayyiinngg  oonn  hheeaalltthh
PPeehhllaa  ssuucchh  NNiirrooggii  KKaayyaais one of the saying. It means healthy body is the most
important pleasure of life.
Good health leads to productive, happy, and a long life. Both
the body and mind need to be healthy. And our relation withthe society should also be healthy. People often think healthis linked to medicines, doctors and hospitals only. This is notalways true.
Hospitals and doctors are necessary when we fall sick. But
first we need to take care of our body. You can preventdiseases, promote health and prolong life.
We say Aarogyam dhansampada. This means health is real wealth. Health
makes us more productive, and ill health causes losses. Ill health keeps us
away from work and livelihood. Ill health means spending on doctors andmedicines. In villages, people often take loans or sell goats and cattle topay for hospital expenses. The money people spend on tobacco and liquoralso causes ill health. Following health practices protect our wealth andincrease productivity.
4
In this lesson we will
learn about
What is health?
What make us healthy?What leads to ill health?How health and ill health
assessed?HHooww  ttoo  rreemmaaiinn  hheeaalltthhyy??
Some parental gifts make part of one’s health. Like body features, frame, height,
weight, looks, skin and color, some mental traits etc. Sometimes we even get
some health problems linked to parental gifts. We
can avoid marriage among blood relatives to
avoid some of these inborn defects.
Many social and economic factors
also cause ill health. Poverty is the
root cause of many sicknesses. Low
purchasing power limits access to
adequate amount of food and
balanced diet. Women suffer from
sicknesses during the process of giving
birth to a baby.
Also health care utilization is impacted adversely on account of poverty.
Ignorance also contributes to sickness. Certain traditional practice are
harmful. You should try to know about these traditional practices in
your village.
A lot of health depends upon factors like
/square6Clean drinking water, clean air
/square6Balanced diet,
/square6Healthy personal habits,
/square6Healthy home and surroundings
/square6Healthy working conditions.
/square6Supportive family, friends and society
/square6Staying away from vices like alcohol, tobacco, multiple partners etc.
Timely use of health services like immunization, birth spacing, mosquito bednets etc is also necessary for health. If we fall ill, seeking treatment early isvery important in several illnesses. Examples are TB, cancer, high bloodpressure, pneumonia, snake bite etc. Late action may harm. Every hourcounts in such situations.
To stay healthy, we need to adopt healthy practices, and use health services in time.16 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
HHooww  ttoo  aasssseessss  hheeaalltthh  aanndd  iillll  hheeaalltthh
We often say that one looks healthier than someone else. Healthiness shows up
in happiness. But we often use ‘measures’ for health.
When selecting young men/women for police or army, parameters such as
height, weight, chest circumference etc are used. We also use several tests(eyes, blood, urine etc) to test assess health of an individual.
We can talk of ill health in similar ways. We relate ill health to illnesses—cough,
fever, diarrhea, TB, polio, drunkenness etc. At the level of community we usesimilar words. For instance, we say there are more people having fever this yearthan the last year, or fewer people with diarrhea or no case of AIDS in thisvillage. Or more infants dying in this village as compared to other village.
Some examples of how we discuss health and ill health in the village:
/square6This year we have more/fewer fevers in the village.
/square6How many TB patients in the village?
/square6Mother and Child deaths in the village in last year.
/square6Number of underweight babies in the village.
/square6Number of teenage girls giving birth to babies.
/square6Number of smokers and alcoholics in village.
/square6Mental attributes-are people happy, number of suicides etc.
You can make our own checklist based on our situation and needs. A
comparison tells us if our village has better health than the last year or thenext village.
TThhiinnkk  aabboouutt::
/square6Why people have to take loan for getting treatment in hospitals?
/square6Why women feel hesitant to talk about their health problems with
male doctors?
/square6Why people keep on waiting for days and months for seeking treatment?17 STAYING HEALTHYCClleeaannlliinneessss  aanndd  hheeaalltthh
Cleanliness is next to Godliness. Many illnesses spread due to
lack of cleanliness. Illnesses like diarrhea, dysentery, cholera,worms, typhoid, skin infections, louse infestations and dentalproblems etc are examplesPersonal Hygiene
5
Personal Hygiene
In this lesson we will
learn about
Importance of personal
cleanliness viz. handwashing, cleaning teeth,nail cutting, daily bath,clean clothes, footwear,hair-care.19 PERSONAL HYGIENE
TTooiilleett  pprraaccttiicceess
In India many people go to open fields for defecation. You need to help them
in getting sanitary latrines installed. These are convenient for young girls,women, aged, sick person and children who often find it difficult to go tofields. You will get more information about construction of sanitary latrinesfrom the block Panchayat office. After defecation, most use water-wash foranal clean up. This soils the hand with germs. It is necessary to wash the handsthoroughly after this, with soap or ash. Some people use paper or leaves ofsome trees for anal clean up. This may be actually healthier as avoids soilingof hands with germs.
HHaanndd  wwaasshh
Many diseases such as diarrhoea, typhoid etc are caused due to germs present
on dirty hands. You should ensure that your hands are clean, especially beforeeating any food. Wash your hands with plain water first and then with soap andsee the difference in wash water. You will appreciate the difference. After goingto the toilet and before having meal, we must wash our hands thoroughly.
Wash the hands with a lot of water first. Apply soap or ashes and rub on the
hands particularly the nails, tip of the fingers and between them. Again, pourwater. Dry it with a clean piece of cloth or napkin.
Cutting nails regularly removes space for collection of dirt. Long nails may be
fashionable but also hide germs, if not properly cleaned.
OOuurr  MMoouutthh  aanndd  tteeeetthh
Our teeth remain healthy if we clean them everyday. Food particles collect in
the tooth gaps. This leads to tooth problems and swollen gums.
We must have a good mouthwash after each meal. This will remove food
particles and prevent the problems of tooth and gums. Just imagine whathappens to a utensil, which was used for cooking food last night and notcleaned overnight. It stinks badly. Similarly if we don’t clean our mouth aftermeals it will also stink. Never have a bed-tea without mouthwash.
Discourage use of raw or burnt tobacco for cleaning teeth. That causes stains.
Smoking also makes teeth dirty.
Use of ash is good, but it cannot clean the gaps.
RReegguullaarr  ttooootthh  bbrruusshhiinngg  wwiillll  rreemmoovvee  tthhee  ppllaaqquuee
Use a soft bristled brush. Be sure it is the right size (a smaller is better than a
big one).
Place the brush angled to the teeth. Brush the teeth toward the gums. Brush
very gently so that any plaque growing under the gum will be removed. Brushthe outside, the tongue side and the chewing surfaces of your teeth. Brushingtongue will make your breath odorless. Stale food and germs can collect onyour tongue and cause bad breath. Brush at least twice every day, before andafter sleep. This would prevent plaque formation.
Brushing too vigorously or using a hard brush may cause damage to gums.Change the brush if the bristles look spread. A worn out toothbrush will not
clean our teeth.
Toothpaste is not always necessary for brushing. Therefore brushing is a cheap
way to keep the teeth and gums healthy.
DDaattoouunn
People in the village often use datoun, a 8-10 inches long and small finger thick
twig of neem, babool or Karanj etc. This practice is good. After chewing thetwig a bit, the end becomes bristly. The bristles can clean gaps between teeth.The medicinal properties of datoun keep the gums healthy. Datoun should not20 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA ne used if there are any ulcers in the mouth. Gargles with lukewarm water are
good for mouthwash after meals and particulars after eating sweet foods.
DDaaiillyy  bbaatthh
Our culture regards daily bath as a ritual. It is indeed necessary in hot weather
as sweating makes us dirty. (In very cold regions one may skip daily baths.) Usewater economically. Some people like hot water. Massage with warm sesameor mustard oil is good before bath. Temperature of bath water should be neithertoo hot not too cold. After retiring from daily work, we should wash feet, handsand face with water to remove dirt and sweat.
CClleeaann  ccllootthh
Clothes with comfortable fitting be used according to season. Cotton clothes of
light colour are more comfortable in summers and warm clothes in winters. Ourundergarments and other clothes must be clean to keep away skin infectionsand louse infestation. A daily change is healthy practice.
HHaaiirr  ccaarree
Combing the hair everyday is necessary for its health. A head-bath is necessary
especially if your hair stinks due to sweating. Mixture of Shikakai, Reetha and Amlasoaked in water is a simple, cheap and safe way for washing oily and sticky hair. Forlouse, we need fine combs. Avoid using somebody else’s comb as it may have louse.
FFoooottwweeaarr
Proper footwear is necessary to keep away germs and worms in the dust from
getting onto your feet. Many people walk or children play barefooted in thefields. Sometimes these fields are also used for defecation. The worms presentin the faeces may get entry in the body when we walk bare footed. You willlearn more about these worms in subsequent books. Dusty and hot weather alsocracks our soles. Some people buy shoes, only to use them during festivals orwhen going out to meet their friends and relatives. This is not good. The Indiancustom of keeping footwear outside the house is good. Everyone includingchildren should always wear shoes when going outside their houses. Shoes arenecessary for those who get cracked heal.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk??
/square6Long nails come handy when some one is attacking you physically.
/square6One can remove food particles in between teeth by needles.
/square6Lack of privacy for bath is a cause of skin illnesses.21 PERSONAL HYGIENEWater Safety
At HomeWater SafetyAt Home
IImmppoorrttaannccee  ooff  wwaatteerr  iinn  hheeaalltthh
Water constitute about two third of human
body. A child’s body has some more water
than old people.
Water is life
indeed. Water
delivers oxygen and nutrients to different parts
of body and removes toxins and wastes. Our
ancestors have taught us to worship water
sources in the village. Good water is god. But
dirty water can be demon.
Many illnesses come from consumption of dirty
water. Diarrhea, dysentery, cholera, jaundice etc
are some such illnesses. Half of illnesses can be due
to dirty water.
HHooww  wwaatteerr  bbeeccoommeess  uunnssaaffee
Water becomes bad when disease-causing germs mix in. Germs come from
human and animal excreta. Even minute quantities of excreta can make water
unsafe. You may say that water appears to be clean but there may be deadly germs
6
In this lesson we will
learn about
How water is important for
human health?
How water becomes unsafe
for drinking?
How to make it safe at
home?inside not visible with naked eyes. So rivers and streams get germs once they pass
through human settlements. Water from shallow wells, ponds is also contaminatedwith germs. Human activity in vicinity of water sources make these waterreservoirs contaminated.
HHooww  ttoo  mmaakkee  ssaaffee  wwaatteerr  aatt  hhoommee
Use only safe sources - a clean hand pump or covered sanitary well or piped
water supply. Fetch the water at evening and keep it covered and still overnight.Stale water is safe at least for two days.
If necessary strain the water in a fold of cloth. It will remove bigger particles
and some insects. Use a clean dhoti or sari.
For any turbid water, use alum to settle dirt. For this just dip alum in the water
for 2-3 rounds and then keep away.
Do not dip hands in the water container. Remember your hands may be dirty.
Children are often in habit of taking water from vessel by dipping their handsespecially after play. Use a ladle (handle-cup) instead.
We can also make water safer by boiling
it for about 15-20 minutes after therolling starts.
Chlorine addition is just one way of
making water safe. Overnight storageof water makes it practically safe.Boiling is good, but also needs fuel.
If you have chlorine drops, add 2 drops in
one bucket. Use this water after keepinghalf hour. If you have no chlorine drops, we canmake a stock solution from bleaching powder.
Take one liter water in a jar. Add a teaspoonful of well-kept
bleaching powder to it. Usually bleaching powder is available withMPW or Nursedidi. Stir it well and keep it still for five minutes. Pour thesolution into a plastic bottle using a strainer. Keep off the un-dissolvedpowder. Cap the bottle and you can use it for 2 days. Take 5 ml (in a big23 WATER SAFETY AT HOME
spoon) and add to one bucket of water and
stir it well. Use the water after half an
hour. Keep the stock solution well
capped. Otherwise the chlorine gas
escapes making it useless. All
families in neighbourhood can use
from same stock solution. In times
of outbreaks of water borne
diseases, every family should take
extra care. Never drink water you are
not sure of. Water safety is possible at
home, and at the village also.
SSoommee  ppeeooppllee  ssaayy  ssoo!!  WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk??
/square6Running water is safe and pure. There is no need to make it safe.
/square6Stale water should be thrown and fresh filled.
/square6Hand pump water is always safe.
/square6Chlorine gives a strong smell to water, so people do not like it.24 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
Disposal of 
Waste WaterDisposal of Waste Water
WWaassttee  wwaatteerr  aann  aasssseett,,  nnoott  aa  hheeaalltthh  hhaazzaarrdd
Pools and streams of wastewater are common scene in a village. Nobody
likes it. This dirty wastewater is from our baths, kitchens and cattle-shades. Mosquitoes breed in such stagnated pools. They give us sleeplessnights and malaria fever. Many deaths occur due tomalaria, and many more fall sick and suffer. Malaria feverincreases risk of abortions. Some other illnesses alsospread due to mosquitoes. We can avoid all this at littlecost and effort.
Wastewater pools also stink. They make life difficult for those
staying nearby.
It is a hazard for small children. Children can fall in these
cesspools and hurt themselves.
We can put the wastewater to good use for a kitchen garden.
This will enrich our meals and avoid sleep less nights. If kitchen garden is notpossible we can dispose wastewater through a soak pit.
7
In this lesson we will
learn about
How do wastewater pools
harm our health? How todispose wastewater invillage so that this is seenan asset and not a healthhazard?
Making a kitchen garden
and a soak pitAA  KKiittcchheenn  ggaarrddeenn
Kitchen garden is a way to use wastewater to produce vegetables for
ourselves. The plants use up the water and we get fresh vegetables at no
extra cost. What we need is only some place to do
this. The vegetables we can grow are:
fenugreek, spinach, dhaniya, carrots,
tomatoes, gourds, lentils etc. We can have
about 20 varieties of vegetables. We
should also grow commonly available
medicinal herbs such as Tulsi, Kumari,
Podina etc alongwith vegetables for use
of common ailments.
If we have more waste water, perennial
trees, fruits and plants like drumstick, mango,
guava, lime, papaya and banana Most people like
fruits and we certainly need them for vitamins and minerals.
MMaakkiinngg  aa  SSooaakk  ppiitt
Soak pit must be used to avoid pools of water, particularly in the streets and
common pathways.
We can construct a soak pit near our house and around public places. This will
absorb drumfuls of water without forming a pool. This will avoid breedingplaces for mosquitoes.
Dig a pit of 1.5 meter length, breadth and depth. At the bottom put loose stones
and brickbats. After filling 1/3 of the pit put smallerhalf size brickbats. Fill 1/3 of the pit thus. Fillthe top third of the pit even smallerbrickbats.
We need to avoid rain water from
entering the pit. For this raise itsborders by 10 centimeters above theground level. Fill it with dry grass orcoconut coir on top. Better put a usedearthen pot at top, with hole in bottom.26 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
This helps in straining. Connect the wastewater into this pot by using a pipe.
Cover entire area with coir. The coir works like a filter. Clean or change the coirevery month.
You can learn and teach people by demonstrating a soak pit construction. You
may also get more information from Panchayat. Explain people about nuisanceof waste water. Motivate people to develop kitchen garden in their houses.Discuss this issue in the village planning meeting. People can help each otherin constructing soak pits.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk  ooff  tthhiiss??
/square6Think of a village without pools of stagnated dirty water? Who will help you
in making this happen?
/square6How will you raise awareness on hazards of indiscriminate wastewater disposal?27 DISPOSAL OF WASTE WATEROur Health Depends
on Food We Eat!Our Health Dependson Food We Eat!
FFoooodd::  CCrriittiiccaall  ttoo  ggoooodd  hheeaalltthh
/square6We all need to eat enough and good food every day to stay healthy.
/square6Eating all types of food is necessary for
keeping our body fighting fit.
/square6We need to eat more food when recoveringfrom illness.
/square6A child needs more food for growth. So doadolescents.
/square6Heavy work requires more food.
/square6Men need little more food for energy in thebody than women.
/square6A woman needs more food in pregnancy and breast feeding. She also needssupplement of iron and calcium.
/square6Certain foods need to be avoided in certain diseases.
/square6All grains and cereals are our staple food. They give us most of energy andproteins. But we need to eat enough of these. Similarly non veg.communities take meat and fish.
/square6Malnutrition contributes to more than half of childhood deaths.
8
In this lesson we will
learn about
The importance of food
elements and simplenutrition messages.HHeeaalltthhyy  ddiieettaarryy  pprraaccttiicceess
Food items in the meals should have all the tastes. Sweet food are heavy to
digest and hence should be consumed first. Avoid overeating. Always try toheat, when one feels appetite. Do not skip meals for long intervals if there isno medical indication. While eating the simple rule is – donot overfill thestomach, one third of the stomach should remain empty for facilitatingproper movements and digestion of food. Do not eat too hot, too cold and toospicy food. Never eat hurriedly. Combination of dal and cereals (like khicri) ishealthy practice.
/square6We should eat thoroughly washed vegetables and fruits as well ascooked meals.
/square6We should eat sprouted grains as often as possible. Such grains are richwith nutrients.
/square6Washing and then cutting vegetables saves important vitamins andminerals. If we cut and then wash, these elements are wasted. (Find out thedifference yourself. Which process makes the wash-water green?)
/square6Iron vessels are good for cooking food as they provide iron.
/square6Use clean utensils for cooking food.
/square6Covering food while cooking saves some vitamins.
/square6Fresh cooked food is better than stale food. Avoid storing cooked food andstore until next meal.
/square6Food should be covered to protect from dirt and insects.
/square6Washing hands before cooking and eating prevents germs enteringour bodies.
/square6Feed children more often, 4-5 times a day. They need to eat frequently.From one year onwards, child can eat from family pot.
WWhhaatt  iiss  bbaallaanncceedd  ddiieett??
Food has five basic elements: fats (fats from oils and ghee), proteins (white of
egg, pulses-milk) carbohydrates (cereals, sugar, sweets), minerals like calciumor iron, and vitamins. Minerals and vitamins are necessary in minute quantities.You will learn about nutritional values of commonly consumed food.
Food grains like rice, wheat, sorghum, maize, ragi, bajra etc make the bulk of
our daily food. They give us energy. Some people think that only rice and wheatare good. The reality is different. Bajra, ragi, jowar, maize are not inferior foods.These also rich in nutrients.29 OUR HEALTH DEPENDS ON FOOD WE EAT!Pulses and beans provide body building
elements. Meat, eggs, fish and milk and milk
products are richer in proteins.
Oils and ghee provide lubrication
besides extra energy. Children need to
eat enough fats. Weight for weight,
they give double energy as compared
to cereals.
Green leafy vegetables and fruits help in blood
formation. Vegetables also give us the fiber
(roughage) necessary for normal bowel movements.
Body requires some minerals like calcium, iron, iodine and zinc. Some
nutrients called vitamins are necessary in small quantities. Both these are
present in vegetables, fruits, sprouts and salts.
You know that drinking water is good for you, but did you know that every
systems and organ of body depends on water. Water is essential for allbody functions.
Do not
/square6Do not drain and throw away extra water while cooking rice.
/square6Do not overcook vegetables.
/square6Do not over polish rice or remove bran from flour.
CCoonncceepptt  ooff  aa  ssqquuaarree  mmeeaall  ––AA
ccoolloouurrffuull  mmeeaall
A square meal has many colours.
/square6The grains are white or brown.
Eggs and fish are also white-grey. Milk and curds is white
/square6Pulses are yellow. So are fatsand some fruits
/square6Leafy Vegetables are green.
/square6Fruits are mostly red and orange. Sois meat and chicken.30 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
Together they provide all the necessary elements for health. Combination of
foods like pulses with grains (khichdi is good), and lemon with vegetablesimproves quality of food.Lemon, guava and Amla increase iron absorption andhelp make our blood healthy red. Fermentation and sprouting increase vitaminsin the food.
AAvvooiidd  jjuunnkk  ffooooddss
Many people like junk foods like cold-drinks, pastries, chocolates, and overfried
food items. These are available in many villages and roadside shops now. Hatsand fairs also offer such foods. Children and young people take to such fancies.Are they really good?
No, nutritionally they are not good : these are also unnecessary. They may have
harmful preservatives in them. The costs are high in comparison to our usualfoods e.g. Sattu made at home. So we have a double loss.
What do you think about this?
/square6Pregnant women, breast-feeding mothers, growing children andadolescents have special nutritional needs. Do we give them less?
/square6Cleanliness in food handling and storage is as important.
/square6Whether a person eats vegetarian or non-vegetarian food, balance ineating all elements is necessary.
/square6Food fads and taboos can lead to poor health. What are common food fads?
/square6Gur –chana, palak, Soya, idli-sambar, sattu are healthy foods.
AA  hheeaalltthhyy  ppeerrssoonn  hhaass  hheeaalltthhyy  wweeiigghhtt
Our body weight is due to our bones, flesh and blood.
A growing child gains weight regularly. Generally a child triples its birth
weight at the age of one year. Adult maintains body weight. Weightreduces in old age.
Underweight is because of under-eating. Majority of village women and young
girls have low weight. Poor diet leads to poor growth in children. Severalchildren in our society are malnourished.
Over-eating leads to storage of fat in the body. Fat people can get certain
illnesses—high BP, heart attacks, diabetes, joint pains etc.31 OUR HEALTH DEPENDS ON FOOD WE EAT!Hence measuring weight is important
/square6Child who is not gaining weight or losing weight can be eating less or be a
sick child (Learn it from Anganwadi behen).
/square6Pregnant woman should gain weight steadily.(learn it from nurse didi)
/square6Diseases like TB, AIDS and cancer cause weight loss.
What do you feel about this?
/rhombus4Some people think it is good to be fat. Others think it is good.
/rhombus4Fasting does not kill. Gluttony does.
/rhombus4Good stamina for work comes from food and exercise.
/rhombus4A woman’s duty is to eat after everyone in the family.
/rhombus4A pregnant mother should eat less to have a safe childbirth.
/rhombus4Malnutrition comes from hunger and starvation. But sometimes evenrich people are malnourished.32 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA OOrrggaannss  aanndd  ssyysstteemmss
Like we build our house, nature has built our bodies. For a house we need
stones, bricks, mud and cement, wood, tins or roof, tiles, pipesand wires etc. From these we build foundation, pillars, walls,rooms, windows, doors, floors, water supply, lighting, kitchenchulha, drainage etc. All these parts have different purposes.Similarly in the body we have many parts or organs fordifferent functions. Together they make the human body.
Different organs doing different work are linked together
as organ systems. Various systems do various tasksnecessary for life. So we have systems for breathing, bloodcirculation, digestion, movement, waste management etc. And all the bodysystems work in cooperation. The body has control systems for this, viz brain,nerves and hormones.
Bones and muscles make the frame and walls. This also makes movement
possible. Small and big, we have about 206 bones in the body of differentshapes. About 100 bones are just in our hands and feet. The joints makemovement possible. Hips, knees, shoulder, elbow wrists, ankle are all joints. Andjoints are so different.Body Mapping and
Overview of OrgansBody Mapping andOverview of Organs
9
In this lesson we will
learn about
Different organs of our body,
mapping organs on the bodyand about which organdoes what.You may have seen the guts of sheep or
chicken. Human gut is about 22 ft long-
more than a room length. Gut is part of
the digestive system and digests/absorbs
food. While passing through, food will
be mixed with secretions from different
glands. It also throws off the waste.
Whatever body cannot put to use in sent
in large intestine and later leaves body
through anal opening. Digestion gives us
energy to work and nutrients to build and
repair the body.
Respiratory system provides us with oxygen by breathing air. Lungs inside
our chest cavity helps us in inhalation and exhalation. Impure air is let
out. Oxygen is necessary for burning food to produce energy.
We have about 5-6 liters of blood in our body. This goes in rounds thanks to
our heart pumping each second. Do you know how much blood the heart pumpsin a day? That will fill a water tanker of 10000 liters in 24 hrs. The heart keepsyour blood pumping at all times as it picks up oxygen from your lungs andnutrients from digestive system and send them to different cells of body.Younger you are faster is your heart beat. The blood carries nutrients andoxygen. It also picks up wastes from the organs. Blood works like trucks andwagons in the body, through the vessels.
Urinary system throws away urine and cleanses the body. Skin also throws out sweat.Reproductive system is different in men and women. It helps in reproduction
and continuation of life on earth.
We know the world through our five windows. We call them sense organs. The
eyes see, ears hear, nose smells, tongue tastes and skin gets touch, pressure,vibration and pain.
Thanks to the Nervous system, we respond to these signals. Human brain is
most complex object in the world. We make necessary movement or changealertness. This is necessary for our survival. The Nervous system controls severalbody functions. Nerves act as electric wires to control all systems.34 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
MMaappppiinngg  aanndd  lleeaarrnniinngg  mmoorree  aabboouutt  oouurr  bbooddyy
Some of our organs are seen from outside like eyes, ears, breasts, testes. Let us
see where the other organs are –
Bony skeleton and attached muscles give body its basic frame. Skin covers all
the body and protects it from outside environment. Soft organs are inside thechest and abdomen. Brain is inside the skull.
A butterfly like important gland (Thyroid) is present in front of the neck. Goitre
is actually a swelling of this. Iodized salt prevents it.
When we take a deep breath the chest expands. The lungs inside the chest and
fill like balloons. The wind pipe in the neck connects the nose throat to the lungs.It indeed looks like an upside down tree, the windpipe in the place of trunk.
Fear or excitement speeds up the heart. Normally heart beats are 72-84 times
in a minute. We can feel the beats pounding in the chest. Put an ear to yourfriend’s chest. Can you hear heart beats? Where is it? Heart is just left of themiddle of the chest. Pipe like blood vessels connect the heart to rest of thebody. These carry blood from heart to all parts. Can you see the veins under yourskin? Blood is brought back to heart through veins.
Let us drink a glass of cold water. Do you feel it going down from throat to
stomach? Food pipe carries food and drinks to stomach in the middle of upperabdomen. Stomach stores and digests food for 1-2 hours. Then the food passesdown the gut.
Do you feel the rumbling in abdomen when you are hungry? A long coil of gut
is in the middle of abdomen. This does further digestion. The long coils lead toa wider short pipe called colon. The well known appendix sits on the colon onlower right corner. Appendix does not serve any special purpose in the body.
Colon is a bent pipe set against the abdomen walls– going up from lower right
side, and then becomes horizontal going left. Then it goes down to the bagstoring waste. Finally it reaches the anus.
Liver is high up on the right side. A swollen liver can be felt below the lower
right ribs. Similarly on the left side we have a small spleen. In some diseasessuch as Malaria, spleen becomes very big. We can feel it below the left side ribs.35 BODY MAPPING AND OVERVIEW OF ORGANSTwo kidneys are filters of blood making urine. They sit on the very back wall of
abdomen. Urine from kidneys reaches urinary bladder through tubes.
One feels tense in the lower abdomen when urine is held up for a long time.
That is where the urinary bladder is. From bladder the urine is let out througha single tube opening on genitals.
RReepprroodduuccttiivvee  oorrggaannss  aarree  ddiiffffeerreenntt  iinn  mmeenn  aanndd  wwoommeenn..
Testes are hanging in a pouch to keep them cool. From the testes two thick
cords carry sperms to two small bags close to urethra. They make semencarrying sperms. The semen is thrown out through urethra at the end ofsexual intercourse.
In women vagina is a passage from private parts to opening of uterus. Uterus
–the womb-is a small purse with thick walls, hanging upside-down in thelower abdomen. It is protected by the pelvic bones. The womb grows inpregnancy with the growing baby inside. In pregnancy we can feel the wombon the abdomen.
Two egg-tubes are attached to uterus on both sides. The tubes have free finger
like ends. The fingers catch the eggs released from ovaries. The two ovariesflank the uterus.
Outer parts of genitals are also different in men and women.In men testes are hanging in a pouch on each side. The urethra opens on the
end of a long muscular penis.
In women urethra and vagina open on the vulva. Inner vulva is soft tags of
flesh. These are aptly called inner lips of vulva. The inner lips are connectedabove at clitoris. Clitoris is small external bud like organ. A fleshy cushion ofvulva–called outer lips–protect all these parts.
The vulva completely folds over vagina in very young girls. Hymen, a thin sheet
with holes covers the vaginal opening. This may be torn after puberty. Afterpuberty the vulva also opens up baring clitoris. Breasts also grow in women atthe age of maturity.
At maturity both men and women have hair on the genitals.36 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA Many young boys and girls are unawares of these differences. During
adolescence their bodies start changing and maturing. They become sensitiveto the differences. You will know more about the health needs of theadolescents in subsequent books.
Girls may be embarrassed by the growing breasts and height, and some of them
take to stooping posture. Boys often worry about the differences in the size ofgrowing penis. Differences in growing moustache or beard and change in pitchof voice can also bother adolescent boys.
Explain these changes to growing children. With maturation comes the
responsibility. Responsible sexual behavior is necessary for health.
We will learn more about organs and systems when it is pertinent for an illness.
TThhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthheessee::
/square6What are the functions of three openings in women’s perineal region?
/square6Why brain is most complex organ of our body?37 BODY MAPPING AND OVERVIEW OF ORGANSWomen and Health
WWoommeenn  aanndd  hheeaalltthh
Many people in our society consider women as inferior than
men. Diseases amongst women and young girls are not
taken up seriously.
Women work both at home and outside. Women have
to spend considerable time and effort for child care.
Fetching water and firewood take many hours of
hard work by women. Tedious work in farm can lead
to health problems.
Women work hard but get lower wages.
Women get less food at home. In
fact they eat at the end when every one in the
family has eaten. Most women are anemic andweak. Their weights are too low to be healthy.
Women are given less opportunity for education.Women have less say in decisions in the family.Women and Health
10
In this lesson we will
learn about
Why women suffer more ill
health and neglect
Attitudes of society on
women’s health
Many men women treat women badly, and
even beat them. Women are also sexuallyassaulted. Such women suffer frominjuries and other health problems.
Women’s health problems are often
ignored or treated late. They have toget permission of the in-laws orhusband’s even for health check up. Theyoften have no money to pay for healthcare on their own. Our health services arealso not fully sensitive to women’s healthcare needs.
Infertility can result from health problems of either husband or wife. But
usually it is the woman who gets the blame and mis-treated.
If a woman gets daughters, she gets the blame again. In reality it all depends
on the man’s sperm. We will learn later to see how the sex of the baby isdetermined. Many families go for abortion if it is a girl baby in the womb asthey want sons. You can check from your anganwadi behen as how many boysand girls are registered at Aanganwadi centre.
Women bear all the trouble of childbirth, abortions. They also bear burden of
preventing pregnancies. Most contraceptive methods are for women and veryfew for men.
Women’s reproductive systems are more vulnerable for sexually
transmitted infections. Vagina provides a larger surface,delicate skin, longer time to hold fluids, moistness tomake germs stay alive for longer. So they get moreinfections than men.
Even illnesses affect women differently. Malaria fever
can cause abortions, affect growth of baby in the womb.
On top of all, women are married young. They suffer its
damage in several ways-socially, economically, andto health.39 WOMEN AND HEALTH
Alcoholic husbands exploit women in several
ways. They treat their family member
harshly everyday to show off the
manhood. It makes women’s already
difficult lives all the more miserable.
There are fewer amenities for toilets for
women. In the village, they have to go to
answer nature’s call either early morning
or evening.
Villages may have no air pollution, but that is not
true for women. They work in kitchen smoke for 4-5 hrs everyday. It gives
them coughs and headaches.
And do you know, still they are hardy enough to live longer than men. If
they get the justice in our families and villages, they will be healthier still.
WWhhaatt  wwee  ccaann  ddoo
Let women also take part in making decisions in the family and village. They should
participate in all meetings. This will make decisions wiser and more practical.
/square6Discuss with men to share domestic work and child care.
/square6Encourage Women to eat well and take enough rest.
/square6Encourage girls to go to higher school and learn.
/square6Try to stop physical or mental abuse of women.
/square6Do not ignore women’s health complaints.
/square6Raise your boys and girls with equal respect and love.
LLeett  uuss  tthhiinnkk  aabboouutt  iitt
/square6Pregnancy and Child care can be shared by the couple.
/square6Is it right to sex-select babies like some people do? Can our world be
without women?
/square6Women and men are born equal. There are many goddesses in ourmythology. Then how can we ill-treat and abuse women?
/square6Why men don’t come forward to accept contraception?40 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
Organising
A Group MeetingOrganisingA Group Meeting
In this lesson we will learn about one way of communication —
Group meetings. You have to match the group, topic and methodof communication. Mismatch of these three will not produce anyimpact. For instance for bringing behavioral change aboutsanitary latrine, we need to talk to women (and men).
We can plan and do it as follows:
Get a group of 5-10 women/men (not more) in
somebody’s house. It is good to select a
venue which is accessible to all
especially women from scheduled
castes/ tribes are comfortable. It is
useful to select a house, which
already have a sanitary latrine.
You need to communicate to people
in advance about the venue and
timing of this meeting. You can also
talk with members of self help group in
the village.
11
In this lesson we will
learn about
How to organize a group
meeting
We can start about health hazard and problems due to openair defecation. Just
provide the beginning or let someone begin.
Gradually other members of group will also start
participating in the discussion and share
their problems.
If we have a model or flip chart about
sanitary latrine, we can share it now. If
someone in the village has got a
sanitary latrine to a smokeless one, that
can be a demonstration.
Explain the basics of the sanitary latrine,
and how one can make it. A good flip chart will
have all that explained in pictures.
Discuss ways of how Panchayat can help families in constructing sanitary
latrines and what assistance is available.
While conducting a group meeting:
/square6Set up some ground rules in the beginning. Let one person speak at a time.Talk with participants with full interest and eye contact. You should beconvinced of the topic yourself for full confidence.
/square6Let your audience participate in the discussions .Encourage them to askquestions. Some people will come out with good ideas. Never scold orridicule anyone. Let things proceed in democratic manner. Let peoplesuggest solutions.
/square6Do not open up topics which are ambiguous or difficult. The messageshould be clear and doable for the group.
/square6You may not complete the topic in the same meeting. One can follow it upin the next opportunity. But take things a step ahead.
/square6Communication is effective if we follow our own advice at our home.People learn better with live example. They learn even better by doing itthemselves. Mere talk, pictures, slogans, songs may not work. (These thingshave a complementary role)
/square6Do not underplay the complexity of the problem. Problems can be reallycomplex. We need to understand the factors and the interplay. For instance42 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
some people say that there is no water to
use in sanitary latrine. Now you have tocome up with solutions.
Change may be slow. However in everycommunity there are some innovatorswho are open to new ideas. You needto encourage them . Sometimes newgeneration takes up changes fasterthan old people. Change is often slow.People cannot give up traditions easilysince they find it easy to work with. Newthings need adjustment.
At the end sum up the discussion and what was decided in this meeting.
TThhiinnkk  aabboouutt  ffoolllloowwiinngg  ::
/square6Some people dominate in group meetings and while some do not speak at
all. What should be done?
/square6I lack confidence while speaking in a group. What should be done?43 ORGANISING A GROUP MEETING
OOuurr  hheeaalltthh  wwoorrkkeerrss
Dai: In each village you will come to know
about Dai ma. There may be more than
one dai ma
in a village.
Dais conduct child birth, although it is not
possible for them to manage women
when there are difficulties during child
birth. You need to develop rapport with
dais in your village. Try to find out them
if they have undergone any training in
past. We will know more about Dai in
following chapter.
Anganwadi Behen: Do you know about the
anganwadi behen in your village. What are her
functions. We will know more about her work in the following chapter.
You will have to work very closely with anganwadi behen. One day in each
month is observed as “Health Day” at centre. You need to mobilize children,
pregnant women for health services offered by nurse Didi on health day.Know Health
ServicesKnow HealthServices
12
In this lesson we will
learn about
Who are the health workers
in village?
What do we mean by sub
centres and PHCs?
Nurse Didi: Where does our nursedidi work from? It is a health sub center. The
sub center actually works for 5-6 villages (3000-5000 population). We have a
nursedidi called ANM and a health worker brother called Male MultipurposeWorker (MPW). Together they do various tasks for the villages. We will need towork with them more closely.
TThhee  HHeeaalltthh  SSuubb  CCeenntteerr
Let us look at our sub center more closely. The
health sub center may be your nearest healthfacility. Our sub center has a nursedidi anda MPW. Their main tasks are:
/square6Immunization of children toprevent six dangerous illnesses.Routine checkup of pregnantwomen, conducting normaldeliveries and post natal care.
/square6Helping couples to adopt spacingand sterilization services.
/square6Treatment for TB, Leprosy and Malaria
/square6Treatment of minor ailments.
/square6Visiting Anganwadis and schools for health check up.
/square6Child care including treatment for diarrhea and coughs
/square6Advice on village sanitation, water safety etc.
The ANM and MPW have difficult tasks. The villages under their care spreadout on 8-10 km area. They have to often walk distances, and be on move. Theyvisit houses to conduct provide some services. For some services likeImmunization, they conduct clinics on a fixed day each month in a centralplace such as anganwadi centres in the village. They have also to make reportsof monthly health activities and attend meetings at PHCs.
WWee  ccaann  ddoo  tthhiiss
Develop good links with nursedidi and MPW. Know about the facilities available
with them. Help them in their tasks.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss??
/square6People say the nursedidi hardly stays at one place.
/square6People call the MPW as the malaria worker.45 KNOW HEALTH SERVICES
/square6Village people don’t support nursedididi, in her work.
/square6Is nursedidi she doing only family planning work?
AA  PPrriimmaarryy  HHeeaalltthh  CCeenntteerr  ((PPHHCC))
A PHC is usually at some big village in your area. Your block may have 5-10
PHCs. Each PHC has 5-6 sub centres and serves 25000-30000 population. Eachvillage falls under one of them. Have you ever been to the PHC?
A PHC has 1-2 doctors, nurses, compounder and other staff. With its 4-6
subcenters the PHC’s main activity is for preventing diseases, promoting healthand treatment of illnesses. Here are the main activities:
National health programmes related to Women and child health, malaria,
filariasis, TB, Leprosy, Blindness, sexually transmitted infections and HIV-AIDS.Some specific activities are:
/square6Immunization against six diseases.
/square6Health services for pregnancy, childbirth and after.
/square6Health check up and treatment of school children.
/square6Control of disease outbreaks- like diarrhea.
/square6Treatment of diseases.
/square6Birth spacing and sterilization, early and safe abortions.
/square6Health education to promote health and prevent illnesses.
/square6Camps for disease detection and treatment, sterilization etc.
/square6Health care during of haats and melas.
/square6Medico-legal work.46 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
The PHC doctor has many tasks to do. Treatment of illnesses is just one. He also
has meetings to attend and he may also be required to conduct post-mortems.
PHC doctors treat illnesses in the Out Patient Department (OPD). Some patients
are admitted in the PHC. Sub center health workers refer patients to PHC. ThePHC may also refer some patients to the CHC or District hospital. Some patientsmay need to go to the district hospital.
Each PHC doctor also visits sub centres covered by that PHC. Doctor has to
supervise work of nursediddi, meet villagers and also provide services.
WWee  ccaann  ddoo  tthhiiss
Inform people about the facilities available at these health centers. For
instance, talk of childbirth or TB treatment and free care.  
Motivate people to use available services at the health centers.Discuss with the doctor or nurse about the health problems of your village
community. Inform them about unusual health problems in your village.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss??
/square6Do people expect free services from a PHC?
/square6How can we help improve the working of this center?
/square6Many people complaint about poor quality of drugs offered at PHCs.
Is this true?47 KNOW HEALTH SERVICESAnganwadi CentreAnganwadi Centre
AAnnggaannwwaaddii
The village Anganwadi is the place where children under six years gather
everyday for three-four hours.
TThhee  AAnnggaannwwaaddii--bbeehheenn’’ss  aaccttiivviittiieess  aarree::
/square6Weighing children every month and record on a chart.
/square6If a child is not gaining or losing weight, she
tries to help.
/square6Supplementary feeds for children.
/square6Offer supplementary food to pregnantmothers too.
/square6Helping with pre-primary education forchildren—through stories, pictures,songs etc.
/square6Advising the mothers about healthy ways ofpreparing foods.
13
In this lesson we will
learn about
The village Anganwadi
centre,
The services offered through
Anganwadi.
How can ASHA and AWW
help each other?/square6Getting health check done for the children. The nurse didi (and sometime,
Doctor) check the children every month. Sick children get medicines. Shealso refers sick children
/square6Helping in Immunization of children.
/square6Registration of births and deaths at the village Panchayat.
/square6With help of Anganwadi-behen , we can detect child malnutrition in time
and help to those suffering with malnutrition.
AAnnggaannwwaaddii--bbeehheenn  nneeeeddss  hheellpp
You can help her in so many ways.
The babies younger than 3 years cannot
come on their own in the AW. Motherssometimes bring them to AW atmealtime. However, often they areeither left at home or taken along onwork. Many babies suffer undernutrition after breastfeeding stops.They remain undernourished. How canwe help in this problem?
Parents assume that the child gets a full meal in
the Anganwadi, and may give it less in the home. This makes thesupplement less helpful. you need to talk to child’s parents on this.
Some difficulties about regular food supply affect AW services. You can
raise these issues during meetings with Panchayat members.
Anganwadi-behen has some records to keep. She is often hard working and
gives lot of time for this work. She can be of great help to you in all yourworks. With her help, you can improve child health services and servicesfor mothers.
She also has some medicines for common illnesses. You can get help from her
if you have some medicines in short supply.49 ANGANWADI CENTRE
TThhiinnggss  wwee  ccaann  ddoo  ffoorr  iimmpprroovviinngg  AAnnggaannwwaaddii
/square6Register all children below 6 years of age to Anganwadi. Encourage
the parents to send their children to Anganwadi regularly once theyare registered.
/square6Help the Anganwadi-behen in her activities. Learn the tasks like weighingbabies, detecting illnesses mark growth charts and understand if there isweight loss.
/square6Counsel the mother (and father also) at home, with help of Anganwadi-behen. Talk to her about right feeding of care of the child.
/square6Motivate the mothers to get check up done during pregnancy and motivateparents to get their children immunised.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  wwee  tthhiinnkk  aabboouutt??
/square6Some people say Anganwadi is only a feeding center.
/square6People complain about quality and quantity of food given to children
at centres!
/square6Do children wash their hands before eating at centers?
/square6Some children take food back home. This food is hared at home with others.Is this good?
/square6Many times nursedidi does not come on scheduled health day?50 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA Village Birth
Attendant or DAIVillage BirthAttendant or DAI
DDaaii’’ss  wwoorrkk  aanndd  pprraaccttiicceess
/square6Dai helps families during childbirth. She is trained by PHC
and ANM to observe Six cleans.
/square6A clean place to conduct delivery
/square6Clean hands with water and soap before delivery.
/square6A clean perineum to avoid infection of motherand baby.
/square6Clean thread to tie the umbilical cord and
/square6A clean new blade to cut the cord and keep theend clean.
/square6A clean cloth to wrap the baby
With this she can ensure the health of the newborn baby and mother. She cansave babies with proper baby care. She is also expected to send mothers withdifficulties to health centers in time.
LLiimmiittaattiioonnss  ooff  aa  DDaaii
Dais have limited understanding of a difficult birth and risks. Often they refer
a mother too late. They need good training and help to understand impendingdangers and refer-escort in good time. Some village dais act as a cord cutter
14
In this lesson we will
learn about
The Dai and her work
The six clean practices
in childbirth
Limitations of DaiHow we can help and learn
from heronly. She is not very active on the after care. This period is important for both
the mother and the child.
Often she gets no support from families.
SSkkiilllleedd  BBiirrtthh  AAtttteennddaanntt
A skilled birth attendant is one who knows how to conduct deliveries,
prevent, diagnosis and manage complications, and refer in childbirth. She candetect dangers soon enough, do necessary things to avoid complications andoffer primary treatment like stitching wounds and give medicines forstopping prolonged bleeding. She is trained and equipped to do this. TheNursedidi can be a good Skilled Birth attendant. It will be good if families cantake the mother to the nearest health center for childbirth, or the Nursedidiattend at home.
TThhiinnggss  wwee  ccaann  ddoo
/square6Help the Dai while she conducts delivery.
/square6Find out from Dai about pregnant women for ANC services.
/square6Learn to help her in newborn care.
/square6Visit the mother with Dai and Nurse didi
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss??
/square6Childbirth looks a simple matter, anybody can do it. Nothing can go wrong.
/square6Old women say they never bothered about childbirth in past.
/square6In some villages dais are considered as doing some “dirty work”
/square6Gradually number of dais in villages is going down. Soon there will be no
dais in villages. We have now fewer dais in the village52 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA CCaauusseess  ooff  iillllnneesssseess
Illness is a loss of health. Often it is temporary as body heals
itself. Sometimes it can be long lasting. Why do we fall ill?Here are some common causes.
/square6Unsafe water and poor personal hygiene
/square6Under nutrition and over nutrition
/square6Accidents and injury, Animal and insect bites
/square6Mental tension
/square6Changes due to ageing
/square6Pollution of air, also noise pollution.
/square6Unsafe sex
/square6Addictions
HHeeaalliinngg
Body has a capacity to heal itself. Have you seen how
a tree heals its axeinjury? First the gum fills the gap. Thegum hardens and gradually becomes wooden. Same Asimilar effect occurs in human body for many illnesses. So youcan see a scar replacing an injury. So are the scars of injury or a wound.Illness and HealingIllness and Healing
15
In this lesson we will
learn about
What is illness, its causes,
germ illnesses, immunity,healing? In this lesson wewill learn only aboutgermillnesses.
Not all illnesses make a scar after
injury–common cold, flu, malaria, sore-
eyes are some examples. But some
illnesses cause a scar inside the body.
TB is one example. It leaves a scar in
the lungs after cure.
Some illnesses have a cause in the
mind–mental illnesses.
Healing is a natural process. Good nutrition
and immunity help healing. Healing leads to cure.
And most illnesses heal. But some can get worse as they have no cures.
Can you name some diseases with no cure.
GGeerrmmss,,  wwoorrmmss,,  iinnsseeccttss--iillllnneesssseess  aanndd  iimmmmuunniittyy
Most of the common illnesses are due to germs, small insects and worms. We
can often see worms in the excreta. The small insects like louse are visible. The
scabies insect is even smaller. Germs are too small to see with eyes. For this weneed a microscope. Have you seen a microscope.
Examples of germ illnesses are: Malaria, chickenpox TB, measles, leprosy, many
types of diarrheas and dysentery. The gravity and period of illness vary with thegerm-type and our resistance to that germ.
Immunity is the resistance of our body to fight germs. Immunity develops as
body gets experience of
fighting germs. Immunity helps us recover from a germ-illness. Immunity may
be natural like in leprosy. Remember only some people get leprosy illness, manyescape it.
Mother’s breast milk gives some immunity for the baby. The first few days’ thick
milk is a priceless shield for the baby. Sadly, many infants do not get it becausewrong beliefs and practices.54 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
We can also create immunity against some germs. We give babies vaccines to
make them stronger against some illnesses. Complete immunization in timeprepare body to fight against germs of certain diseases.
For many germ illnesses, we use medicines. TB, malaria, and leprosy are some
illnesses we can cure with medicines.
But some illnesses like hydrophobia; AIDS, etc are without effective cure. These
small germs are called viruses. Recently AIDS has some good medicines thoughno permanent cure is possible.
TThhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss
/square6How can we increase our resistance to illnesses so that we do not fall ill?
/square6Why we not see the small pox these days?
/square6Do you come across about hydrophobia patient in your village? Why are
people so afraid of a dogbite?55 ILLNESS AND HEALINGDDiiffffeerreenntt  hheeaalliinngg  ssyysstteemmss
Nature heals most illnesses. Our body has such healing
properties—like the tree healing itself. We can help the process
of healing with medicines. We need good nutrition for that.
We have many types of healing systems. The Angreji system
is well known. Ayurveda employs herbal and other
medicines. Sidhaa is a similar branch. Unani is also herbal
system. Homeopathy uses very small dose of medicine in
sugar based tablets. Naturopathy uses water, mud, diet etc
for cures. Yoga also heals some illnesses. In acupressure and
acupuncture, special points on the body are used to cure
health problems. In the village the traditional Baiduses herbal remedies.
We You will learn about some medicines in
this programme.
TThhee  AAllllooppaatthhiicc  ssyysstteemm
About 300 allopathic medicines are
essential for a hospital. For primary carewe need very few medicines.Using RemediesUsing Remedies
16
In this lesson we will
learn about
Different healing systems like
the allopathic and IndianSystem of Medicine (ISM),
Use of select allopathic
medicines in primary care,
Abuse of injections and saline,
avoiding overuse of medicines.
In this programme you will learn to use 4
some internal medicines/drugs.Paracetomol (para), chloroquine(chloro), Iron Folic acid (ferrous) andORS. You will learn to use medicinesbelonging to other systems(Ayurveda) later.
Annexure at the end of this book tells
you about use of each drug; dose, howmany times to be given, side effects, andprecautions. Read carefully all this before usingthe drugs.
These medicines are safe, cheap and very effective. They will help us in many
illnesses. We will learn about some more medicines in the subsequent books.
OOvveerruussee  ooff  IInnjjeeccttiioonnss  aanndd  ssaalliinnee  ((bboottttllee))
Injections and saline are necessary only in some situations.
Injections and saline used in clinics are not so often necessary. Frequently
injection and saline are given for profit and not for cure. False beliefs aboutinjections and saline are rife. We become poorer by paying the hard earnedmoney for many needless injections and saline. We can save these expenseswith help of simple remedies and raising health awareness. But peoples’attitudes take time and efforts to change.
Patients are being charged anything like 50 Rs more for one bottle. It is just
water and salt and some sugar. If we prepare and drink at home it, the cost isjust fifty paise. Its effect by mouth is also equal to saline. Some patients insistson injections and bottles and doctors also are driven by profit motives. You caneducate people about utility/futility of injections and bottles.
TToonniiccss
Tonic bottles are also very popular. Many healers prescribe and patients ask for
tonics. Are tonics necessary, do they give us strength as promised?
The answer is NO. No medicine book prescribes tonics. Tonics are just some
water, sugar, vitamins and some minerals. The cost is often very high. In the57 USING REMEDIES
same cost one can take an egg daily or a glass of milk for a full month. This is
a much better buy for the money. Tonics also create a false sense of cure. Manyparents wants their doctors to prescribe tonics for their children.
You need to educate people on the futility and costs of tonics. It will save
peoples’ money being wasted. It will also help them in improving their diet.
AAvvooiidd  sseellff--mmeeddiiccaattiioonn
Some people buy drugs for illnesses without information. Some people use
medicines lying in the house for illnesses. This can be unsafe. Expired medicinescan cause health problems.
AAvvooiidd  oovveerruussee  ooff  mmeeddiicciinneess
Medicines are very useful and are life saving at times. Overdose can be harmful,
especially in children. Medicines can have side effects too. You should ask yourdoctors about the dosage schedule of drugs. Inadequate dosage doesn’t help.Education about rational drug use in community will help our work. Andprevention is better than cure. We need to learn and teach how we can avoidgetting illnesses by improving our living conditions.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk??
/square6Injection and saline is a must for cure.
/square6Children need tonics for weakness.
/square6There is pill and injection for every illness.
/square6People can reduce or increase weight by taking tablets.58 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA FFiivvee  iimmppoorrttaanntt  mmeeddiicciinnaall  ttrreeeess  aanndd  ppllaannttss
Our country has a very rich source of medicinal plants. We can use
these for being healthy and treat ailments at little cost. Some treesin the neighborhood are angels in green. We will learn about justfive of them now.
1. Neem (Azadirecta Indica)
Neem tree is well known. Its leaves, fruits and outer portion of thestem have medicinal property.
Leaves are used for skin diseases like eczema, infection. The oil prepared with
extract of neem leaves is useful in itching and wound healing.The decoction of crushed neem leaves is also used for thesame purpose. Neem is a great antiseptic and pest-controlmedicine. Decoction of the outer portion of its stem is alsohelpful in various diseases. Therefore, preserve and cultivateneem plants.
Making neem oil: make 100 ml fresh juice of neem leaves.
Add 25 cc sesame oil to this. Slow boil the mixture undercover. The water part will completely evaporate in half anHome RemediesHome Remedies
17
In this lesson we will
learn about
Some plants and trees with
medicinal use
Simple home remedies and
herbal remedies
hour. Cool and filter it. This is neem oil for wound
care. Keep it in a well-capped bottle. It will stay
for one year. Apply this to wounds 2-3 times a
day. This heals the wound well.
For childbirth injuries, neem water bath is a
healing treatment. Crush some leaves of neem
and put them in warm bath water. Let the mother sit
for fifteen minutes in this bathtub.
2. Tulsi (Oscimun Sanctum)
Tulsi is a small herb, but having great medicinal
properties. Tulsi leaves are mainly used for someailments. They are useful in cough and cold. Givethe tulsi juice with honey. The leaves are hot innature, that is they are used in kafadosha. Thedecoction of Tulsi leaves is also useful forcough. The leaves are chewable.
The seeds of tulsi are cold in nature. Hence the seeds
are used in heat (pitta) disorders like heart burn, bleedingfrom nose, Burning feet, bleeding piles, sore mouth etc. Give the seeds with milkor ghee. Soak 20-30 seed grains in water or milk. This is a dose for once. Takeit 2-3 times a day.
Take about a cupful of tulsi leaves. Soak them in water for five minutes. Then
crush them on a stone. Strain in cloth and collect about 20 ml juice (half a cup).Crush more leave if necessary to make 20 ml. This makes 3 doses for one dayfor an adult. This is good for cold and fever illnesses. Give it for 3 days. Forchildren the dose could be 10 leaves juice, 2-3 times a day.
3. Kumari (Aleo Vera)
Kumari (Aloe) is a garden plant. In wounds, we
can appear aloe in place of a medicated
dressing. Take a piece of aloe about the size
of the wound. Cut it into a slice. Clean the
wound with water. Apply the aloe slice on it
and tie up with a clean cloth bandage. Change60 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
the dressings everyday. It heals faster. It is very useful for burns treatment
as dressings.
Kumari is used in several Ayurvedic preparations. It is useful for liver disorders
and women’s illnesses like pain in the periods. It is also used for dandruff andfor the growth of hair.
You can grow kumari in your garden and ask people to grow in the kitchen
garden. It is hardy plant and stays for years.
4. Adusa (Adhotoda Vacica)
Adusa is small shrub grown for fencing. It is good remedy forcoughs. Use fresh
juice or decoction of leaves. Fresh juice of leaves is used
with honey. It is useful for bleeding disorders eg. Bloodin cough, blood in stools, urine etc.
Take 50-60 gms of adusa leaves and wash them clean.
Slow boil the leaves in one liter of water for half an hour.About one fourth water should be left. This is adusa Kawatha for coughs.Cool and filter it. Give 20 ml once, 2-3 times a day for three days. One canadd sugar or honey as per requirement.
5. Kuda (Holerrhena antidysenterica)
This is a forest tree with typical fruits. The fruit is black in color when fullyripe. The fruit is like thin doubledrumstick but in twins. The bark or coverof the tree-stem is used for medicine. This is a good medicine for loose
motions and dysentery. You can simply groind a piece of
bark and mix with a spoon of honey and give as
medicine. Kadha (Kawatha) also is useful. For
this take a 10 gm (2 teaspoon full) of bark
powder, add one glass (200 ml) of water and
boil. Boil it till ¼ water remain. Cool
and bottle it. For an adult 20 ml kadha
(Kawatha) for 3 times a day is useful to
stop dysentry.61 HOME REMEDIES
SSoommee  ssiimmppllee  hhoommee  rreemmeeddiieess
Haldi (turmeric) is a powder of a root. It is widely
used in our country in food as spice and as
medicine. Its medicinal antiseptic properties areknown since hundreds of years. For bleedingwounds press with Haldi powder to stop it.Haldi also has great wound healing properties.People use haldi with oil for cuts and abrasions.This is good practice. The practice is to apply it withmilk and chana dal flour (besan) at the time of bath, asUBTAN to improve complexion.
Triphala is a very useful combination of three fruits:
Aamla, Hirda, and Beheda. We can use the triphala
powder in constipation. It is useful to reduce
obesity and diabetes. Its external application is
very useful for healing wounds. Triphala powder
can applied on skin at the time of bath. Its
decoction is useful for gargling in illnesses such
as sore throat, Stomatitis, and bleeding gums.
Triphala powder is also used as tooth powder and
vision disorders.
Oil massage is good for pain in the joints. Medicines may still be necessary for
joint pains. Sesame oil or coconut oil are considered good for massage. Massageimprove blood circulation in the skin.
Mulethi is very a useful plant. It is available as
small dry sticks. The stem is used to improve
voice if it is hoarse. It is given with honey.Mulethi powder is useful in cough and hyperacidity . It improves the brain functionwhen given with cow's milk. It is also usedin pitta disorders-because Mulethi hascooling properties.
Mulethi is used as an external application to improve skin
glow. The powder is applied with haldi powder and milk.62 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
Mulethi improves general health. It serves as a
tonic when taken with shatavari (Asparagnc)powder and milk Especially in lactating mothers.
Aamla Powder with ghee is useful in
Hyperacidity.Gulkand (Rose Petal in sugar) + Ghee is also useful in
heartburn.Warm/hot water sips if helps to reduce dry cough.
Lemon juice with sugar & salt helps in diarrhoea.
Honey is good for cough, and use as a vehicle for medicines.
For gaining weight use milk and ghee if is available.
Head massage with oil helps to overcome sleeplessness.We will learn more on herbal remedies with other illnesses and topics in the
next book.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss??
/square6Herbal remedies are for poor people.
/square6Herbal remedies take long time to act.
/square6For herbal treatment, you have to observe many apathyas. (food
not allowed) and Pathyas (and food allowed) as per our tradition ofAyurveda advice.
/square6Plants have no side effects.63 HOME REMEDIES
Preventing Unwanted
PregnanciesPreventing UnwantedPregnancies
CChhiillddbbeeaarriinngg  aaffffeeccttss  wwoommeenn’’ss  hheeaalltthh
Early marriage and teenage pregnancy is damaging to a woman’s health in
several ways. It leads to abortions, premature births, risky childbirth, small baby,and subsequent effects on the family. It takes away the joy of living,prematurely. Girls tend to drop out from school due to early marriage. We canstop early child marriages by creating awareness in community. Talk about lawsagainst child marriage.
Repeated pregnancies cause anemia, cancer cervix and prolapse
of uterus. Repeated childbearing causes a woman lot of stress.
Her health deteriorates.
Abortions are best avoided, except when essential. We will
know about termination of pregnancies in other books.
Unsafe abortions through illegal providers (quack or doctor)
are riskier than childbirth. Abortions can also cause infection
and sterility. In India abortion is legal and can be obtained on
specified grounds.
Abortion is available at recognised MTP centers on specified
reasons such as Danger to life or risk to physical and mental
18
In this lesson we will
learn about
The links between childbearing
and women’s health.
How abortions can also be
harmful and can be avoided.
Couples have unmet needs of
contraception to meet.
The couple’s options deciding
number of children needs tobe respected.health of woman, Pregnancy on account of rape and When there is risk that
child is born will suffer from deformities and diseases.
However, selection of sex of foetus is illegal and abortion should not be sought
eliminating female fetuses.
CCoonnttrraacceeppttiivvee  nneeeeddss
Many couple don’t want more children.They also want some years gap between
children They are not using contraceptives for various reasons. You can helpthem in meeting their contraceptive needs. Planned pregnancies and births canadd to the joy of life. Couples can plan it with help of safe days and othercontraceptive methods. Spacing between two children keeps mother andchildren healthy.
Contraception methods are available to prevent and space pregnancies.
Preventing unwanted births is a right of every woman and couple. We shouldtry and meet this unmet need.
RReevveerrssiibbllee  ccoonnttrraacceeppttiivvee  mmeetthhooddss
We have temporary (reversible) and permanent contraceptive (sterilization)
methods. In the next chapter we will talk about condoms for men.
Use of condom by the husband is the easiest options for spacing between
two children. Condom is a rubber balloon available at PHC or SC Healthworkers, or at the common village shops. You will also have condoms in yourkits. It prevents entry of seeds present in semen. Condoms also preventsinfections in genital tract of women and men. Condom should be removedcarefully after each intercourse to avoid leakage. If not used properly thismethod may fail.
IuDis a device used for spacing. It is inserted in the uterus. Doctor or nurse
puts an IUD in uterus after proper examination. This method is most
reliable. Proper selection of a woman is necessary for IUD. There areother temporary contraceptives available for regulating interval betweentwo births.
Oral pills: woman has to take one tablet daily for 28 days. Injectable
contraceptives are also available with private practitioners. We will know about
these methods soon.65 PREVENTING UNWANTED REGNANCIESCChhooiicceess  iinn  mmaatttteerr  ooff  CCoonnttrraacceeppttiioonn::
Government policy does not promote any specific method for contraception.
Each women and couple has to decide about particular contraceptive methodbased on their reproductive intentions and preferences, after analyzinginformation about contraceptives and matching their own preferences. You cancounsel the couples about contraceptive methods.
As ASHA, you should counsel couples about available contraceptive
methods. You can also get more information about contraceptives fromnursedidi and doctor.
TThhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss::
/square6Abortion is good family planning method.
/square6Decision about family planning method should be left with the
nursedidi/doctor.
/square6Government should give incentives for those accepting sterilisation.66 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA UUssee  ooff  CCoonnddoommss::
Condoms provide protection against unwanted
pregnancy and sexually transmittedinfections including HIV/AIDS. A newcondom is to be used each time of sex.Correct and consistent use ofcondoms is essential.
Following steps needs to be followed.
/square6Squeeze the tip of condom and put
it at the end of erect penis.
/square6Keep sqeezing while unrolling thecondom until it covers all penis. The loosepart at end will hold semen.
/square6After the men ejaculate, he should hold firm rim of condom andwithdraw from vagina.
/square6Take off the condom. Tie at other end and do not let semen spill.Dispose off the condom properly.
/square6Keep condoms in cool dry place and away from sun light.Condoms:
An Option for MenCondoms:An Option for Men
19
/square6Help people make individual choices about spacing methods.
/square6Keep stock of condom and show how to use it, and make
condom available.
If situation is suitable, you can show the couple how condom is used. Use a flipchart and a condom piece. Sometimes you will have to show it to the womanand ask her to share it with the man. You may use a banana (as a penis model)for demonstrating it.
Many brands are available in market. Some brands have a soft grainy surface to
enhance pleasure. More expensive brands are also available in different coloursand fragrance.
Some myths and misconceptions about condoms need to be answered. The
misconceptions are: a) Condoms reduce pleasure of sex b) A condom user is apromiscuous person.
The female condom is now available in cities. With this even women can use a
condom. That is helpful when men are unwilling to put on condom. It empowerswomen in risky sex situations.
TThhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss::
/square6Free condoms are not of “good” quality.
/square6Nursedididi always talk about sterilizations of women.
/square6Men can’t use condoms properly under the influence of alcohol.68 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA Registration of
Pregnant WomenRegistration ofPregnant Women
PPrreeggnnaanncciieess
Childbirth is a natural event. However many women can suffer and die due
to complications during pregnancy or delivery. Any pregnancy can bedangerous for a mother. We can not foresee all these problems. Treated intime, we can ensure safety of mother and child. Regular check ups duringpregnancy are necessary.
Anemia in pregnant women is a major contributor to
mothers’ deaths. Half the women have anemia. Some of themare very pale. Nurse will be able to detect anemia and providetreatment.
/square6Swelling of feet, breathlessness, headaches, blurredvision and fits are serious complaints.
/square6Severe pain in abdomen any time during pregnancy isrisky and needs immediate attention.
/square6Bleeding per vagina any time during pregnancy and afterchild birth is risky.
/square6Continuous leaking of fluid from vagina can cause infections andpremature birth.
20
In this lesson we will
learn about
What are the major risks in
pregnancy?
Why it is necessary to get
all pregnant womenregistered early?/square6Very young mother is likely to suffer several problems. She must have her
childbirth in the CHC or City Hospital.
/square6Dangers are present even during childbirth—bleeding, retention of placentaor lack of progress.
/square6Sometimes placenta is retained after childbirth.
/square6There may be high fever during pregnancy and after child birth.
WWhhyy  RReeggiissttrraattiioonn
As said above any pregnancy can end up as a difficult and child birth. Hence,
it is important that all pregnancies are registered and good care is availableto them.
Registration will allow nursedidi to conduct regular checkups and talk to her on
issues related to her own health and health of growing baby inside. Encouragewomen to register themselves for Anti-natal care as soon as they are sure ofpregnancy. A pregnancy test is available at PHC or at other health facilities.
Invariably one day is fixed at each anganwadi centre as health day. You should
accompany pregnancy women especially from poor sections of community.
Encourage women to follow advice given by nursedidi during pregnancy
check ups.
Every women need to undergo four checkups during pregnancy.You have tablets for prevention of anaemia in your drug kit. These tablets can
be given to pregnant women, if she has not received from nursedidi.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk::
/square6Many women feel that pregnancy check up is waste of time.
/square6Nursedidi does not came in time at centre and women have to wait
quite long.
/square6There is no privacy at AWC for abdominal examination.
/square6Many women go to private doctor for ANC?70 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA JJaannaannii  SSuurraakksshhaa  YYoojjaannaa
It has been estimated that nearly 1,20,000 women in India
die each year due to pregnancy related complications. Mostof these deaths are preventable by timely management ofcomplications during pregnancy, child birth and immediatelyafter birth.
Child birth is safer at a hospital equipped with all facilities to
treat complications during pregnancy. Many women deliverat home due to several reasons. Also families find it difficultto arrange merely for transport and buying medicines or pay doctors fee etc.
Government of India has started a new scheme Janani Suraksha Yojana for
women belonging to Below Poverty Line (BPL). Salient features of this schemeare as follows:
Eligibility for JSY and cash awardsCash assistance to all women belonging to BPL families and attained 19
years age. Women undergoing third live births are also eligible providedthey undergo sterilisationJanani
Suraksha YojanaJananiSuraksha Yojana
21
In this lesson we will
learn about
JANANI SURAKSHA YOJANA
Eligibility criteria for
benefits
Your role in Janani Suraksha
YojanaRs. 700 are to be given to women
Rs. 600 cash assistance will be given to ASHA which will include transport costs
and other expenses incurred during her stay with women at hospital.
YYoouurr  rroollee  iinn  JJaannaannii  SSuurraakksshhaa  YYoojjaannaa::
/square6Identify pregnant women from BPL families and get her registered
with nursedidi.
/square6Help pregnant women from poor families and get BPL card from Gramsevakif she does not have it already.
/square6Help women to receive at least 3 ANC check ups and counsel for hospitaldelivery Identify in advance place of delivery
/square6Escort the mother to pre identified health centre and stay with her, till sheis discharged
/square6Register birth with Panchayat or inform the Nursedidi.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss??
/square6Men usually run away when blood is required to be given to women during
delivery through operation.
/square6In hospital, employees demand money from delivery cases.
/square6Many poor families don’t have BPL card, while others who are well of takeadvantage of BPL benefits.
/square6Can women go to private hospitals and also entitled for benefits underthis scheme?72 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA HHIIVV  iiss  aann  iinnffeeccttiioonn
HIV is a very minute germ. This germ hurts the very human defence system that
fights all germs. HIV infection is detected with a blood test. A person havingHIV germs in the blood is considered as HIV positive. Infection cannot beidentified without a blood test.
The germ HIV is passed on from one to the other person:
/square6Through unprotected Sexual intercourse with a person who is HIV positive.
/square6Through blood transfusion when blood is taken from HIV
positive individual.
/square6Through contaminated needles used previously in a HIV positive person.
/square6From HIV positive pregnant woman to child duringdelivery or afterwards.
HHIIVV  iiss  nnoott  ppaasssseedd  oonn  bbyy
/square6Touching and kissing a person.
/square6Just living together.
/square6Playing, swimming together.
/square6Using common bathrooms and toilets.HIV and AIDSHIV and AIDS
22
In this lesson we will
learn about
What are HIV and AIDS?
What can we do to preventits spread?RRiisskkyy  sseexxuuaall  bbeehhaavviioouurr
The main cause of HIV-AIDS spread is risky sexual behaviour. Sex with multiple
partners without condom is the risky sexual behaviour. Men having sex withmen also exposes them to risk of infection.
TThhee  wwiinnddooww  ppeerriioodd
After exposure to risky situations, HIV test will be positive only after 6-12
weeks. This is the window period. So one has to wait for this period to get anHIV test.
In our country more than 85 percent of HIV transmissions take place through
sexual route. There are not “high risk groups” but there are some people whohave high risk behaviour. AIDS can strike anybody depending on your behaviour.
AAIIDDSS  iiss  tthhee  iillllnneessss
AIDS is the illness due to HIV infection. This may take months and years after
HIV test is positive. The person is infective in this period. AIDS is a seriousdisease without permanent cure. But now we have some medicines to reduceits severity. Suggestive symptoms of AIDS:
/square6Continuous weight loss,
/square6Persisting diarrhoea,
/square6Repeated fever illness lasting more than one month.
/square6The minor features include chronic cough, itching, rash on body andgenitals, oral thrush (fungal infection), buboes, and illnesses comingtoo often.
WWee  ccaann  PPrreevveenntt  AAIIDDSS
Prevention of HIV/AIDS is the only effective way of removing this deadly
disease. Following points are important.
Creating awareness in community about risk causation and spread of HIV/AIDS
and its seriousness.
Advising men and women to avoid sex with multiple partners.74 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA Consistent and correct use of condoms prevent infection.
In some hospitals we have special services for pregnant women. This involves
counseling, blood tests and provision drugs to HIV +Ve mothers. This will reducethe risk of infection to the baby.
Awareness among adolescent boys and girls about healthy family life including
sex education is important.
Adolescents should have access to information as AIDS transmission and
prevention. Adolescent girls are vulnerable.
Blood testing facilities are available at most district hospitals. Here blood test
for HIV/AIDS is done along with counseling services.
TThhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss::
/square6Prevention is better than cure. HIV and AIDS is an example.
/square6Should HIV test be done before every marriage?
/square6People in city only indulge in having sex with multiple partners75 HIV AND AIDSBBrreeaasstt  ffeeeeddiinngg  ––IItt  iiss  iimmppoorrttaanntt  ttoo  sshhaarree  tthhiiss  aaddvviiccee
wwiitthh  mmootthheerrss
Immediate breast feeding within half an hour after birth is vital for the baby. It
gives baby nutrition and immunity against illnesses. It shrinks the mother’swomb and reduce bleeding. Milk flow is better with frequent suckling.
Breast milk is the best food for the baby till 6 months. No other feeds including
water are necessary. Consult a Nursedidi if a mother has any breastfeedingproblem even after your help.
Mother’s breasts get prepared for producing milk during pregnancy. On delivery
the breasts are ready to secrete thick milk called colostrum. The baby should befed with colostrum as it protects the baby from germ-attacks. This should not
be thrown away.
Breast milk provides for all the needs of the baby. It also
contains sufficient water for the baby’s needs. No need for
feeding water separately. More the baby suckles, the more
milk is produced.Breast FeedingBreast Feeding
23
In this lesson we will
learn about
The importance of
breastfeeding a baby.
Basics of brestfeedingIt protects the baby from getting diarrhea
and pneumonia.
Breastfed babies normally feed every
two hours. Well fed babies sleepquietly for 2-3 hours, and gain weightnormally.
Breastfeeding postpones mother’s
menstrual cycle. Hence many of them donot get pregnant soon. You will learn aboutcontraceptive effects of breast feeding in theprogramme.
Help for problems like cracked and sore nipples, painful breasts due to
milk hold up. If the nipples are sunken the baby can not suckle well.
Mothers need to be reassured about their breastfeeding abilities and that baby
gets adequate nutrition. Breastfeeding can prevent more than 10 lacs childdeaths each year. Breastfeeding should be continued whenever possible for atleast two years.
BBrreeaassttffeeeeddiinngg  bbaassiiccss--hheellpp  tthhee  mmootthheerr  ttoo  bbrreeaassttffeeeedd
/square6Clean the nipple of the breast with warm water before feed.
/square6Hold the baby horizontal on the lap or besides if the mother is lying on side.
/square6Hold the breast at the root of the nipple. Put the baby’s mouth to the
breast. The baby gets a full hold of the nipple now. This is evident from thebaby’s upturned lips.
/square6Make sure the baby’s head and body is held facing thebreast without turn and twist.
/square6Support the baby’s head with one hand.
/square6Clean the nipple after the baby leaves the breast.
/square6Change the side for the next feed.
/square6For a cracked nipple help the mother to massageher breasts gently, applying turmeric with edible77 BREAST FEEDING
oil to nipples in such conditions. A plastic nipple
is very useful in this situation.
For sunken nipples pull them out gently
and often by hand. Place a soft rubber
nipple-shield directly over the retracted
or sore nipple for the baby to suck on.
This helps the baby to breast feed. It also
helps in bringing out the nipple.
Clean the nipple shield thoroughly before
and after every feeding.
Some mothers get dribbling from the other breast if the baby is on one
breast. But this is not a rule. No need to worry if dribbling is happening
or not.
TThhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss
/square6 Often a baby is breastfed only after the third day. This starves the
baby and affects the milk flow.
/square6 Pre lacteal foods are given to many new born babies. Are theseany good?
/square6 Many babies are breast fed for 3 year.
/square6 Many mothers are not sure if her baby is being fed adequately andhence they resort to top feeding.78 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
CChhiilldd  ffeeeeddiinngg  pprraaccttiicceess  aafftteerr  ssiixx  mmoonntthhss
/square6After six months of only breast feeding, the baby needs extra food to grow.
Start one new food type at a time, not many.
/square6Food like gruel, porridge, cooked vegetable, fruit pulp isgood for babies after six months age. If top milk is given donot dilute it. Dilute milk is often the cause of malnutrition.
/square6Prepare semi solid feeds from roasted, puffed grain, flourprepared from fermented grain (satva) are easy to digest.
/square6Add oil or ghee to child’s food to improve nutrition.
/square6Eggs are a good source of body building elementcalled proteins.
/square6Babies and children need frequent feeds every day. Childshould be offered food every three to four hours.
/square6Washing hands before preparing food and feeding child is essential.
/square6For older children (2 years) keep food ready and reachable for the child. Thechild should it eat whenever hungry e.g. Roasted groundnuts and Jaggery(gud) are popular.
/square6Eggs, groundnut, Soyabeans, fish are high protein foods. Child growth isbetter with these feeds.Infant NutritionInfant Nutrition
24
In this lesson we will
learn about
Foods for the baby after six
months of exclusivebreastfeeding.
Eleven golden rules for child
feeding./square6Avoid market packed feeds (formula feeds) as they are
costly and give false confidence to the parents.
/square6 Feed child gently, never use force.
SSoommee  ootthheerr  ttiippss
While feeding with spoon place it on the middle
of tongue to avoid spitting by the baby.
Cleanliness has to be maintained while preparing
the food of baby. Maternal hygiene needs to
be promoted.
TThhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss
/square6Many parents give top feed only after the baby is 1year old.
/square6Girl babies get less attention and feeds from male children.
/square6Who feeds children when parents go to work?80 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
Some home recipes for child feeding children
Rice and dal Khichdi with ghee or oil–Porridge – semolina (suji / rawa), singhada, Ragi flour, Hyderabad mix
(preparation of Hyderabad mix –  one katori rice, half katori chana dal, one-forth
katori ground nut to be roasted and powdered.)
Cooked vegetables – spinach, pumpkin, carrots, potato, beans, tomato
Fruit pulp of banana, papaya, apple, chikku, and mangoImmunizationImmunization
WWee  sshhoouulldd  kknnooww  tthhiiss––
Many serious germ diseases in children can be prevented by
immunization vaccines
BCG prevents Lung TB.OPV (Polio dose) prevents Polio.DPT protects the child from Diphtheria, whooping cough and Tetanus.Measles vaccine prevents measles.These vaccines are given free to all children by the
nurse didi in your village. They are also given at thesub centers and the PHC.
Vaccines need cold storage during transportation to
retain their power.
Child gets fever after DPT injections. This can be treated
with ‘Paracetomol’ tablet or liquid.
25
In this lesson we will
learn about
Vaccines for six dangerous
illnesses of childhood.
Importance of Vit A dosesTo convince parents to take
their children forimmunization.
BCG is usually injected on the baby’s left
shoulder. A scar is formed six weeks after
injection. It shows that the child may have
become immune to Lung TB.
Give also five doses of vitamin A. Start
from nine months age, and give every six
months. This protects children from night
blindness. Vit A also boosts child’s
immunity against germs.
We all know that many parents deny their
children immunization. Immunization boosts body’s fighting power
against diseases caused by germs. You can help them by explaining
benefits of immunization. Accompany them during immunization
services in village.82 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
Name of vaccine When to give
BCG At birth or any time up to one year
Polio - 0 At birth (if delivery is in institution)
Polio – 1+DPT 6 weeks
Polio – 2+DPT 10 weeks
Polio – 3+DPT 14 weeks
Measles+ Vit A (1ml) Nine months
1st Booster DPT & Polio +Vit A 2ml 18 months
Vit A 2ml 24 months
Vit A 2ml 30 months
Vit A 2ml 36 months
If a child is not given the right vaccines in time, get them started whenever possible
and complete the primary immunization before child reaches first birthday.SScchheedduullee  ffoorr  iimmmmuunniizzaattiioonn  &&  VViitt  AA::83 IMMUNIZATION
MMaakkee  ssuurree
Immunization card is given for each child by the health
worker and to be kept safely for further follow up. Thechild gets full immunization in time. Parents shouldbring the child for immunization as per schedule.Only complete immunization protects the child fully.Partial immunization does not protect and gives falsesense of protection.
Some people have misconceptions about
immunization. You need to dispel these. For instancesome people feel that immunization is harmful to babies. Orit causes fever and therefore illness. Another misconception is thatimmunization should not be done if the child is sick. Ask your nursedidiabout questions raised by the parents about immunization.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss??
/square6People feel that quality of vaccines offered in villages is not good.
/square6Some people feel that despite complete immunization children get Polio?
WWhhyy  ddooeess  ddiiaarrrrhheeaa  ooccccuurr??
Many children get diarrhea in your village. One or two among may have even
died due to the illness. Germs are the main cause of childhood diarrhea.These germs come from unsafe drinking water, unclean feeding practices,bottle feeds etc. We can avoid these problems with help of families and thevillage community.
WWhhaatt  hhaappppeennss  ttoo  cchhiilldd  wwiitthh  ddiiaarrrrhheeaa??
Water makes up to 72-75 percent of children’s body weight. That makes life
possible. What if we lose even some water? Think of a plant without water. Wehave a pretty flower plant in our house. We forgot to water the plant. We knowwhat would happen to it!
Water loss can be fatal. Whatever the germ of diarrhea, the
dehydration is the cause of deaths. You have to act in time.
Let us understand the stages of water loss.
RReehhyyddrraattiioonn
Treatment of diarrhea is very easy and quite effective.
The principle is to prevent dehydration.(loose motions
may not stop for 2-3 days) Water needs to be restored
quickly. Continue feeding. If child is breast feeding, it
should continue.DiarrhoeaDiarrhoea
26
In this lesson we will
learn about
What causes diarrhea.
How diarrhea can be fatal?How severe is the
dehydration.
How can we save such
children at home?HHoommee  AAvvaaiillaabbllee  FFlluuiiddss  ((HHAAFF))
Give the baby a lot of watery foods like ‘Sharbat’, coconut water, rice-kanji,
light tea etc. You should talk about commonly available, locally acceptedliquids which are given to children.
OOrraall  RReehhyyddrraattiioonn  SSaalltt  ((OORRSS))
ORS packets are available in your kit and with other health workers.
Take one liter of water in a clean container. Empty the full packet of ORS in
this. Stir it. Start giving this fluid spoon by spoon to the child. Prepare freshORS everyday.
OOtthheerr  ttiippss
/square6Mother/father or other care taker, should wash hand properly before
feeding the baby. It should not give new infection.
/square6Give ORS spoon by spoon to avoid vomiting.
/square6If possible, use boiled water for preparing ORS. At least make sure it is fromsafe sources.
/square6Continue breastfeeding if the baby is breastfeeding.
/square6Give other foods and drinks along with ORS.
/square6Bottle feeding is bad for any child. Avoid it in diarrhea also.
WWhheenn  ttoo  rreeffeerr  tthhee  cchhiilldd
/square6If dehydration is severe. (Start fluids and then send)
/square6If the vomiting does not stop85 DIARRHOEA
Dehydration Child is Thirst Tongue Eyes Talu (AF) Skin fold on Urine
and pinching
mouth
None Alert, present moist moist normal Normal, returns normal
restless quickly
Mild Restless, present dry Dry and sunken Fold   stays   a Little
Dehydration irritable sunken while
Severe Sleepy, Not dry Dry and sunken Fold  stays  for absent
Dehydration floppy drinking sunken longSSeevveerriittyy  ooff  ddeehhyyddrraattiioonn  ooff  cchhiilldd/square6In case of convulsions
/square6If the child has fever.
/square6If the child gets blood in stools.
/square6REFER the child to the PHC/CHC where facilities for admission are
available. If possible, escort the family.
/square6This child may need fluids through bottles.
HHooww  ttoo  pprreevveenntt  ddiiaarrrrhheeaa??
To prevent diarrhea keep the home and its surroundings clean. Prepare the food
in clean vessels and store in clean conditions. Do not allow house flies to breedin neighboring places. Wash hands before eating and after defecation with soapand water. Never use food that is going spoilt. Summer season hastens spoilingof food. A thumb rule, use freshly prepared food and within one hour.
WWee  ccaann  ddoo  tthhiiss
/square6Identify children with diarrhea.
/square6Know the signs of dehydration.
/square6Learn to prepare ORS at home.
/square6Refer or accompany the child to hospital if seriously ill.
/square6Discuss with people about cleanliness of home, while cooking and storing
foods.
/square6Discuss with them about not to stop feeding babies who have diarrhea.
/square6Discuss with them about futility of injections, unless really needed.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss??
/square6By knowing how to treat diarrhea you can save children’s death.
/square6Each child with diarrho`ea needs bottles. Do you agree?
/square6How housefles transmit germs of diarrhoea?
/square6Young children put every thing inside the mouth and this leads
to diarrhoea.86 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA AAcchheess,,  ppaaiinnss,,  bbooddyy  ppaaiinnss  aanndd  iinntteerrnnaall  ppaaiinnss
Aches and Pain is one of the most common complaints. It is a signal that
something is wrong inside the body or particular part having aches.
Ache is a mild pain and we know of body ache, headache,
backache etc.
We can group pains and aches related to head, skin, muscles,
bones, and joints, limbs etc as ‘body pains’. Generally theseare easy to treat.
The pains related to inside organs of chest, and abdomens are
internal pains. You will refer all these problems to the doctor.We will learn about them in the next book.
We describe various types of pains: Cutting, burning, pricking, stabbing,
writhing, twisting, squeezing, throbbing, splitting, bursting, dragging, etc. Thesepains are specific to organs and underlying diseases.
Many illnesses cause various pains. We can often find out an inner illness from
the pain it causes. Heart attack, stomach ulcer, urinary stone, appendicitis,Aches and PainAches and Pain
27
In this lesson we will
learn about
What are aches and pains?
About body pains and
internal pains.
How to treat body aches
and painsmenstrual pain, fractures etc are some examples. Pains associated with
concerns are also common.
PPaaiinn  rreelliieeff
Pain is only a symptom of some illness inside. We need to find out the illness
and treat it whenever possible. Many drugs are available for pain relief. Forrelief of internal pain organ-specific remedies are available. Here we will seeonly about body aches and pains.
Headache, backache, body aches are often relieved with simple Paracetomol
tablet. For its dose please see last section
Ayurveda suggests gentle oil massage for body aches and backaches.Acupressure suggests pressure points for many types of aches and pains.Drinking a lot of water can relieve burning pain occurring while passing urine.Good rest and sound sleep often relieve headaches and body aches.
RReeffeerr  ttoo  aa  hhoossppiittaall
/square6Any pain with convulsion
/square6Chest or abdomen pain
/square6Headache with neck stiffness
/square6Headache of only half of head
/square6Any pain associated with burn injury and in joints.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  wwee  tthhiinnkk  ooff  tthhiiss??
/square6Is injection is the best remedy for pains of all types?
/square6People have less tolerance of pain these days than before.
/square6Many people take liquor and bhang like substances for pain relief.
/square6Some faith healers in villages try different rituals. Are these rituals
any good.88 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA UUnnddeerrssttaannddiinngg  aabboouutt  TTuubbeerrccuulloossiiss
A minute germ causes TB. It spreads from one person to
other through breath. A TB patient’s sputum hasthousands of TB germs. Also while coughing or sneezingthe germs spread in the air. The germs also stay in dustfor long and affect people. TB germs enter the lungs ofnearby persons. In a weak person the germs survive andproduce an illness. It may take months.
TB can affect any part of our body. But Chest TB
is the most important. It spreads from one
person to other through air.
TB is serious illness. Any one, rich or
poor, adults’ male or female and
children can suffer from TB. Under
nutrition, weak immunity,
overcrowding and poor living
conditions etc. help Tuberculosis
spread.TBTB
28
In this lesson we will
learn about
Cause of Tuberculosis
Suspecting TuberculosisReferral to health facility for
diagnosis and treatment.
We have good drugs for TB today than we had before.
SSuussppeeccttiinngg  TTBB
A person suffering from TB has one or more of these symptoms.
/square6The most common symptom of TB is cough lasting 3 or more weeks.
/square6Sputum cough
/square6Evening fever with sweating,
/square6The patient may also have chest pain.
/square6Coughing up blood. (Bloodspit)
However, the following four points are important for suspected TB cases.
/square6Diagnosis needs checking patient’s sputum under microscope.
/square6Escort the patient to nearest CHC/PHC, where facilities are available.
/square6No fees are charged for any tests or the treatment.
/square6AIDS patients can also have TB.
CCuurree  ffoorr  TTBB
Very effective cure for TB is available. One has to take the medicines in
front of ANM or MPW or any health provider. This is called directlyobserved treatment (DOT). The improvement occurs in a few weeks.However, the full treatment takes 6 to 8 months in most cases. Our rule isto make the patient complete the full treatment. You can also be aprovider for DOTs treatment to TB patients in your village. Try to get moreinformation above DOTs treatment from nursedidi or male worker. Duringtreatment the sputum is tested periodically for germs of TB. Rememberthat services are available free!
SSoommee  pprreeccaauuttiioonnss
/square6One should cover the mouth with handkerchief while coughing and
sneezing. This halts spread of germs.
/square6One should take the medicines regularly. Keep a follow up for this.
/square6Persons having TB should avoid close contact with young children.
/square6Children should get BCG vaccine in time that prevents serious formsof TB.90 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA WWee  ccaann  ddoo  tthhiiss
Find persons who may be suffering from TB. Look who is getting cough for more
than 3 weeks. Take the person to health center for sputum test. Tell TB patientsto take medicines regularly. Encourage them to complete the treatment. Tellpeople all tests and treatment is free at all government hospitals. Even privatedoctors can arrange DOTS treatment.
Inform people that BCG vaccine prevents TB. All children should get BCG
vaccine as per national schedule.
Educate patients to cover their mouth while coughing and sneezing. Also tell
them not to spit here and there.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss??
/square6Some people say TB is incurable disease.
/square6TB patients must eat eggs everyday to recover.
/square6Why some patients of TB stop treatment before completion?
/square6Why patients go to private doctors though government gives
free treatment?
/square6Many TB patients don’t like to take anti-TB drugs due to side effects.91 TBSSoommee  uusseeffuull  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn
Most snakebites are non-poisonous. Snakebites are common in rainy seasons
and night hours.
Two-fang marks are typical of a poisonous snakebite. Look for fang marks. It is
easy to know the 4 common poisonous snakes. Cobra, krait, big viper and thesmall viper are the four main harmful snakes.
Effective and quick first aid can save most patients. No magic or
temple prayers can undo the poison bites. The 90% cases are
saved because the bite was non-poisonous. Panic can
also kill.
Drooping eyes or bleeding are first signs of poison.
Drooping eyelids or sleepiness point to cobra and krait bites.
Bleeding from bite, gums, urine, in vomit means viper bite.Snake BiteSnake Bite
29
In this lesson we will
learn about
How to identify poisonous
bite
What is the correct first aid
for snakebite?FFiirrsstt  aaiidd  iinn  aannyy  ssnnaakkee  bbiittee
Reassure the person and the family. Tell them it may be non-poisonous. Make
the person lie down and relax. Do not make patient walk. . In case of nonpoisonous snake bite, it s enough to clean and disinfect the wound.
Tie the entire limb with an elastic bandage. This slows blood flow from the limb.
Then tie a stick to the limb to lessen movement.
Shift to the nearest hospital. Keep looking for poison signs of drooping or
bleeding. Take along the snake if it is brought killed. This helps intreatment. Now specific anti snake venous infections are available. Youshould know about the hospitals where anti snake venom drugs areavailable in your area.
Many people kill snakes indiscriminately. This is not good. Snakes eats
rodents which causes loss of our food grains. And many of them arenon-poisonous.
DDoonn''ttss
/square6Do not waste valuable time in a temple or with a Tantrik. Remember even
some Tantriks have died due to snakebite.
/square6Do not tie a tourniquet (single band string as was practiced till sometimeago). This causes the bite to bleed and may also stop blood flow to the limb.More than 2 hours to tight tourniquet can cause blackening and then lossof the limb.
/square6Do not kill and waste chickens as some villagers do to treat snake bite.
WWhhaatt  ddoo  yyoouu  tthhiinnkk  aabboouutt  tthhiiss??
/square6Some people kill every snake they see.
/square6Snakes eat up rats and save our food grain.
/square6Snakes remember and identify a person.
/square6Snakes also take revenge.93 SNAKE BITEMedicines Action & use Dose Side Effects
Paracetomol Reduces More than 12 years: 1 to 2 No side effects.
fever and 1tablet 3 to 4 times a day If taken too many 
pain: useful 8 to 12 years: 1 tablet 3 to tablets at one time, it
in fever, 4 times a day can cause damage to 
headaches, 4 to 8 years: ½ tablet 3 to 4 liver. Keep the backaches, times a day medicine away from 
body aches Less than 4 years: ¼ tablet children. Should be etc 3 to 4 times a day. Crushed taken only after 
in honey meals.
* Chloroquine
/square6Fever More than 14 years: 4 May cause nausea, 
Tablet with tablets vomiting or 
chills 9 to 14 years: 3 tablet giddiness.
/square6Malaria 5 to 8 years: 2 tablet Can be given to a fever 1- 4 years: 1 tablet pregnant woman.
Keep the medicine away from children.
Iron Tablets
/square6Preventi 2 tablets daily for 100 days; Should be taken 
(adult) on of for prevention of anemia, after meals. Can cause
/square6Anaemia one Tablet for 100 days stomach upset. Stool Treatment (motions) may be 
hard and black.
ORS packet Replaces As required. In adults: Half a Throw ORS solution 
salt and glass with every stool. after 24 hours. Make water in In child: 1 teaspoon after it fresh. Do not use a our body every stool. packet if it is like a
cake. 
* Gentian Kills many For application on wound, Stains clothes. Let is 
Violet liquid germs inside mouth, vagina etc dry before putting on 
clothes.
* Antiseptic Kills wound Only for external use, Make very dilute 
lotion germs wound wash etc solution. 2 drops in 1
cup of water. Maysometimes causeirritation.94 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA 
SSnnaakkeess  gguuaarrdd  ssoommee  ttrreeaassuurreess  hhiiddddeenn  uunnddeerrggrroouunndd..
Drug kit to be used for first learning exposure1
1For Ayurvedic and herbal remedies, pl see section on Ayush* These and some more medicines will be covered in the next book.