Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare
Government of IndiaReading Material
 forASHA
BOOK NO-5
asha
1Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare
Government of IndiaReading Material
for
ASHA
BOOK No.5
January 2008
2About Book No-5
The concept for developing Book 5 for ASHAs emerged during a ASHA group
mentoring meeting. This book is envisaged to strengthen her role as a healthactivist. As a result, the Reading Material for ASHA and the Facilitator’sModule are developed.
The Reading Material for ASHA is developed to provide ready reference
material. The topics included are:
Knowing Myself
ASHA as a Health ActivistValues of ASHAUnderstanding the Human Rights and the Fundamental RightsUnderstanding the Meaning of the Right to Health
Leadership
Communication SkillsDecision-Making SkillsNegotiation SkillsCoordination Skill
s
The reading material may be disseminated among the ASHAs prior to training.
This will orient them about various topics before they participate in the
training based on Book 5.
Module developed by: Ms Pallavi Patel, Deputy Director, CHETNA, Ahmedabad
Advice provided by: Ms Indu Capoor, Director, CHETNA, Ahmedabad
January 2008
3
Contents
Knowing Myself .................................................................... 5
ASHA as a Health Activist ....................................................... 10Values of ASHA .................................................................... 15
Understanding the Human Rights and the Fundamental Rights ............ 18
Understanding the Meaning of the Right to Health ......................... 23Leadership ........................................................................ 32Communication skills ............................................................ 38
Decision-Making Skills ........................................................... 44Negotiation Skills ................................................................ 47
Coordination Skills ............................................................... 504
Acknowledgments
Reading Material for ASHA Book No 5 has been conceptualized and developed
by the collective efforts of numerous people. This book will enhance thecommunication skills, negotiation skills and leadership qualities of ASHA andbring out her role as an activist. This in turn will help in the success ofNational Rural Health Mission.
We are especially grateful to Shri Amarjeet Sinha, Joint Secretary- MOHFW,
for providing the vision, constant support and encouragement.
We would like to thank the sincere efforts and hard work put in by the team
of CHETNA- Ahmedabad especially Ms. Pallavi Patel- Deputy Director and Ms.Indu Capoor- Director, in developing and editing the book.
We also  express our gratitude to all the members of ASHA Mentoring Group
especially Dr. H. Sudarshan, Dr. Thelma Narayan, Dr. Nerges Mistry,Dr. Abhijit Das, Dr. Nupur Basu Das and Ms. Seema Gupta for providingcritical feedback during development of this book.
Dr. T Sundararaman, Executive Director-NHSRC and Dr. Dinesh Agarwal,
Technical Advisor UNFPA, New Delhi deserve special thanks for enhancing thetechnical quality of the book.
Our heartfelt thanks are also due to Dr. Ajay Khare and his team from
Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh for providing support in organizing training to fieldtest this module at Chindwada district (M.P), Dr. Vijay Singh Kamya, BlockMedical Officer, Tamiya, Community Health Centre (CHC) and Dr. AshokKumar Nagdev, District Ayurveda Officer, Junardev, all the ASHAs and teammembers of CHETNA who actively contributed in the field testing.
We would take this opportunity to thank Dr. Dinesh Baswal, Assistant
Commissioner (Trg.) and Dr. Savita Mehta, Consultant (Trg.) for their sincereefforts in shaping this book.
Dr. Narika Namshum Dr . I. P . Kaur
Deputy Commissioner (MH) Deputy Commissioner (Training)
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Government of India Government of India
January 2008
5
Knowing
Myself
Understanding oneself is crucial to know about one’s own personality and
temperament, our strengths, limitations and areas for development. Theprocess of knowing oneself is continuous and we need to review our strengthsand limitations from time to time, which will help us to change. We need toconstantly grow in our capacities in order to ensure that we are able tofacilitate the process of development and empowerment at the community
level too. However before we attempt to empower the community we need
to know whether we are empowered ourselves.
Remember we were created by nature with a unique body, soul and mind. All
human beings have different characteristics and personalities. The externalenvironment influences our personality. As  women, directly or indirectly, weare told that ours is a subordinate role. We usually do not question this kind of
attitude towards us. In fact, we are not trained to question the daily
inequality that we face. We accept the social norms without any questioning.A woman who questions them, is viewed as “out of control.”
Let us understand how this attitude affects our personality. In our Indian
society a woman is identified by her relationship with others, like that of adaughter, mother, wife, etc. Being brought up in a patriarchal society, a
woman internalises these norms, which makes her devalue herself. She does
not think of herself as worthwhile and neglects all her needs. All this affectsher self-esteem and overall personality.6As a woman you must have experienced that you are expected to be humble,
to put your needs after that of other people, to learn to say “yes” all thetime to others’ requests, to please everyone so as to feel valued and to seekconstant approval.
This is a hard pattern to break. However, now that you have started your
journey as an ASHA you need to first identify your own needs in order to be
able to understand and appreciate the needs of others.
Let Us Understand the Meaning of Self-Esteem
Self-esteem refers to the perception that  you have about  yourself.  It is about
how much  you  value  yourself  and  how  important  you  think  you are.
zIt is about being confident about and satisfied with your own self.
zIt is about a reasonable sense of your self-worth.
zIt is about having faith in yourself and your abilities.
zIt is about being pleased with yourself and with your achievements.
Remember, it is NOT about
zConvincing yourself that you are of value
zFeeling confident or feeling good when other people praise you
zHaving beautiful features
Let us examine the characteristics of a person with healthy self-esteem:
zSelf-confidence
zAbility to express true feelings
zAbility to recognise and value own accomplishments
zAbility to forgive self and others
zAbility to welcome change
If you do not take care of yourself, respect who you are and respect your own
needs, you will not be able to take care of others and respect their needs.
Give some time to know yourself. There is a need to go through the process
of self-realisation. It will help you to build up a healthy self-esteem.
Maintain a diary about your dealing with others and yourself during the day.The process of understanding the self and self-realisation is continuos and one
needs to do it systematically.7Think about the following questions. Answering them will help you in self-
reflection. More questions may be added.
zWhat are some of the difficulties that I face in order to complete my
work?
zWhat are some of the changes which I will practice if I have to deal with
this situation again? (The changes can be related to behaviour, way of
working, etc.)
zWhat did I do today for which I am not happy? Why?
zWhat did I do today which has made me happy?
Remember , each day must contribute to your overall goals in some way. Each
day must in some way be connected to the rest of your life. Each day shouldcontribute to your general welfare, happiness and empowerment. This will
also contribute to the development of your community. We have 24 hours in a
day, out of which we spend about seven hours sleeping. Out of the remaining17 hours, we need to think about how many we actually spend on self-development. As an ASHA we suggest that you initially need atleast half anhour everyday for yourself in order to grow and develop. You may increasethis period as you get more familiar with this practice. We need to plan for
our self-development from today. You may use the tools given here for help.
8My Self Development Plan
Name:
My Strengths:
My Limitations: 
I want to… Time frame
 ….improve the following
 three qualities/skills. List them
  in order of priority
 1
23
How will I improve myself?
What difficulties do I foresee while implementing my plan?How will I overcome these difficulties?
Whose support will I require?
How will I monitor my self-development plan?Suggestions for monitoring my self-development plan:Review your daily performance as you close the day. Note the efforts you
made for self-development as per your plan. If you have not been able todo it, think about the reasons. Reflect on what you will do differently so
that you do not come up with these reasons again.
Try to maintain a diary and write down the important steps that you have
taken to develop yourself, what difficulties you faced and how youovercame them.
You may share your self-development plan with a person whom you trust.
You may take regular feedback from that person to learn whether she/he
has noticed the changes in you.
Note:  Once you achieve what you had planned, develop a new plan and
follow the same steps .9Some Tips to Achieve your Goal
zBe passionate about your goal. Passion is the energy that drives us. Let
your passion carry you, because it will carry you far!
zBe persistent; never give up!
zIf you want to enjoy the beautiful view from the top, you will have toclimb over every obstacle. If you are not prepared for this, stay at basecamp!
zLove people and treat them with respect and honour. Without them it is
impossible to achieve the goals of development. Along with a strong will,passion and persistence, you need to feel competent in your skills. Developthe most appropriate skills. Average skills will get you to the middle. Topskills will let you achieve your final goal. Make sure that you are growingday-by-day, month-by-month, year-by-year. You can always learn new
things. Even if you only improve a little at the beginning it will keep
accumulating and eventually become a large amount!
zAs an ASHA, demand the best from yourself and from others. Unlike a
common person, an excellent person makes great demands on herself/himself.
zAs an ASHA you are unique.You are talented and skilled and, therefore, you
have been selected to serve the community. Make maximum use of your
potential and make sure that you achieve your goals. You need to have astrong will. A strong WILL can move mountains.
10
ASHA as a
Health Activist
Your role as an activist to improve the access of marginalised and
disadvantaged community members to public health care services is very
important. Before we discuss your role in detail, let us visualise a situation.
Rami lives next to your house. She is five months pregnant. She is very weak,
but has not registered her name with the ANM. Rami does not receive any
healthcare services. Her husband is a drunkard. Everyday he drinks and shouts
at Rami, sometimes even beats her.
You feel uncomfortable and want to stop this. You discuss this with other
women in your neighbourhood. They understand your point of view. Together
you decide that if Rami’s husband creates problems, all of you will collectivelygo and stop him.
You all manage to do so. You inform Rami’s husband that if this happens
again, you would inform the police.
Next day when the ANM (Auxilliary Nurse Midwife)  comes, you take Rami with
you and register her name.
Well, admittedly a real situation does not get handled this smoothly, but you
will never know just how it will fare unless you try it out. You need to take
the first step towards bringing about change. Initially you will be alone but
slowly, with your efforts of creating awareness through one-to-one approachor by addressing the issue in the village meetings you will have many to
support you in your endeavour.11The above effort is an example to explain “activism”
As an ASHA you are expected to play the role of an activist. So it is important
to understand how it is done. Read the following real life examples ofactivism.
Anti Arrack Movement
In 1991, women from Dubagunta, Nellore district of the Indian state of
Andhra Pradesh, drove away the liquor contractors from their village. This
is said to have been the beginning of the Anti-Arrack (local liquor)Movement, which finally led to the prohibition of alcohol in the state on16 January 1995.
The main participants in the early struggle were poor rural women,
predominantly from scheduled castes and backward classes, supported by
voluntary organisations and, later, by politicians from opposition parties.
This is not just a story, it actually happened. It is about what a miracle that
common women were able to achieve collectively. It is about a communityof hard-working women who laboured in the fields to earn their living.Unfortunately, all their labour was wasted on arrack and toddy (locallymade liquor). The menfolk of this village were so addicted to liquor that
they not only spent money on it, but also sold the hard earned food
materials, pulses, chillies, rice, butter and ghee (clarified butter), inexchange for liquor. At times, when their earnings were not enough, theyincurred debts or stole household articles like goblets, plates or even theirwives’ saris.
After drinking arrack they would use foul language, beat their wives and
children making their lives miserable. The women felt extremely helpless.
There were two liquor shops in the locality. The village men used to gostraight to these shops in the evening after returning from work. Theycame home late at night, completely drunk.They would hand over somemoney for household expenses only if there was any left.
The situation reached a climax when one man, in an intoxicated condition,
stabbed his father to death. Apart from this incident, Vijayamma, a woman
of this community was embarrassed when her relatives visited her houseand, to her shame, were scared away from the village by the obscenelanguage of her closest neighbor, a heavy drinker. She felt ashamed andthought that the village would be a much better place without arrack.
Everyday while working in the fields and at the community wells the
women discussed the arrack menace. One day the women joined together
and approached the village president (Sarpanch) and the village elders.They expressed their problem and asked them to get r emove the arrack and
toddy shops. The elders and the Sarpanch, although agree able, were unable to
do anything12The next day one hundred of the women gathered together. They went to
the outskirts of the village and stopped a toddy-cart.‘You cannot come intothe village’, they told the cart driver strongly in unison and stood in frontof it. ‘Throw all the toddy away.’ Each of them offered him a rupee to doso.The driver got scared and left the village.
Then a jeep with arrack packs arrived. The women surrounded it and
demanded that it returned without unloading the arrack. After two days the
police were called. They said that all those who bid at auctions have theright to sell arrack.The women stood unmoved. They said that they wouldgo to the Collector and will not keep quiet if arrack was sold in theirvillage. The arrack contractors got cold feet. They made several plans, butnothing worked and they gave up.
These events gave strength to the women. All this happened only because
the women united and struggled strongly to get rid of arrack from theirvillage.
The story of Dubagunta spread in the form of an agitation to other parts of
the district.
In the literacy classes of other villages teachers started sensitising the
community through puppet shows about the problems caused by arrack. They
also shared the story of Dubagunta village.
Women of other villages had also suffered a lot. There were quarrels every
day in their families.They survived only by taking refuge in neighbouringhouses. Daily, for two-three hours they had to put up with this situation.There was not enough food for their children. So, women in other villages
considered doing in their village what the women in Dubagunta had done
earlier. The members of three literacy centres discussed this issue. Theteachers supported and guided them. Finally, they also attacked the arrackshops.
They too managed to stop the arrack business in their village.The women in
Dubagunta initiated and led a movement in which women from other
villages joined and ultimately the situation changed for the better.
Chipko Movement
The Chipko Movement was initiated in the Uttarakhand region of India by a
group of villagers who opposed the commercial cutting down of trees. Themovement was led by women who were influenced by Mahatma Gandhi.
For rural women, saving the environment is crucial to their economic
survival. As primary food, fuel and water gatherers, women have strong
interests in reversing deforestation, desertification and water pollution.The women made a living in the Himalayan foothills, using its forests assources of food and fuel. They faced a particularly severe challenge in the131960s, when India, to enhance economic development, started to cut trees
to export the wood and earn foreign exchange. As a consequence, the hillsoil washed away, causing landslides, floods and silting in the rivers belowthe hills. Crops and houses too were destroyed, and women had to slog evenmore for their fuel, fodder and water. All in all, it was the women whowere the main victims of India's deforestation policies.
Against these harmful deforestation policies a movement called Chipko was
born. “Chipko” in Hindi means to cling, reflecting the protesters’ maintechnique of throwing their arms around the tree trunks marked to be cut,and refusing to move. In a remote hill town a contractor had been giventhe right by the state to fell 3000 trees for a sporting goods store. The areawas already becoming barren. The women of the village decided to fight
against this. When the woodcutters were scheduled to arrive, the men were
lured away from the village leaving the women at home, busy withhousehold work. As soon as the woodcutters appeared, the alarm wassounded and the village's female leader, a widow in her 50s, collected 27women and rushed to the forest. The women pleaded with the woodcuttercalling the forest their “maternal home” and explaining the consequences
of felling trees. The woodcutters shouted at and abused the women and
threatened them with guns. The women in turn threatened to hug themarked trees and die with them. It worked! The frightened labourers leftand the contractor backed off. In 1974, women in a nearby area used thesame tree-hugging technique in order to protest against the clearing oftheir forestlands.
Similarly, in your community you may come across several issues that require
to be addressed. For example, the anganwadi is not functioning well; childrenand women are not receiving their entitlement of supplementary food; themidday meal provided is not adequate or cooked properly. It could be thatwidow pension is not being received in spite of all the required formalitiesbeing completed by the widows of the village. So, to bring change in such
situations, some collective action is required.
However, activism or protest is not the first step in any process towards
change. First, one needs to understand the situation and find out if thingscan be changed through simply drawing the attention of the authoritiesthrough letters, appeals or direct dialogue.
For instance, you can meet someone of importance concerning the issue, like
the Sarpanch, the ANM, the schoolteacher, the Talati and discuss the matter
in order to resolve it.
Activism may not always be the best method of changing the world but it can
be quite useful under the right circumstances. It gives voice to a cause.
Activism is particularly useful/effective when you have many people who are
affected with the same issues and the situation needs to be changed. If you14decide to initiate a movement along with the people to change a situation,
first see if there is some organisation or institute working on the same issueand try and seek their support or join them in their efforts.
As an ASHA there are Some Key Principles that You Need
to Keep in Mind in Activism to Bring about Change
1. Identify and work on the issues that are most crucial and urgent and are
affecting the larger community.
2. Involve the people who are affected and ensure that they cooperate with
you.
3. Let it be a people’s movement and struggle rather than an individual effort4. Mobilising the community takes time and will be energy consuming. Do not
lose patience and hope.
15
Values of
ASHA
For every individual, values are the central guiding force for all behaviour and
attitudes. Culture, experience, education, religion, law, language and media
influence values. It is also important to know that values can change. Whileworking on social issues, we are basically working with the attitudes andbehaviours of the community and the programme implementors for a positiveand desired change. Hence, it becomes very important to address the valuesof individuals for social development.
Every individual has her/his own values. There is noth ing like  right or wrong.
Generally, they are received from our parents, our society and oursurroundings. Values shape our personality and  identity and are directly
connected with our vision of life. They guide us to decide our goal and act onit. For example, If I know the destination that I have to reach, I can alwayschoose the correct path when I come to a crossroads.
Without a clear sense of purpose and values, we are  lost and confused. For
example, whether to spend time in gossiping or in my work will depend on myvalues.
Values remain in the subconscious mind and act like red and green traffic
lights.They tell us what we should or should not do. Values are a set of beliefsabout what is good and desirable. They are based on assumptions about how
the world works. Our idea of what is the right thing to do in a situation
comes from these values.16Some examples of values which are required for social development include:
1. Value of Equality
zIn a patriarchal society women are viewed as submissive, weak and soft
and men as strong and powerful. Due to this thinking men are given morerecognition, power and respect in the family and society whereas womenare usually viewed in a supportive role. As a result, girls and woman haveless access to resources. For example, girls and women are given less food
than boys and men of the family.
Men and boys are given more scope to develop themselves, e.g., men
are given more opportunity for basic and higher education. Men, usually
   inherit the properties of the family, while women usually do not get
a share.
If you believe in patriarchal values you will not see anything wrong if a
woman is ill-treated. If you believe in equality you will respect a woman as
a person.
zIn our society the structure of caste is very strong and people who arefrom a socially advantaged class are in favour of maintaining status quo.Due to the caste structure, certain people of our society do not getopportunities to develop and get the benefits of the mainstream. As an
ASHA we have to first understand problems of the poor and marginalised
communities. They need to be educated about their rights andentitlements. Empower them. Encourage them to share their views andfeelings. Treat each individual equally irrespective of her or his class, caste,sex and religion.
2. Value of Responsibility
zYour behaviour should be responsible. You should promote your own health
and that of your family and community. You may keep your own house
    clean and throw garbage in the street, which is not responsible behaviour.    As a member of the community you need to throw garbage at the    designated place so as to prevent infectious diseases.
zThe Sarpanch of your village has the power to make decision for thedevelopment of your village. Many times people misuse this power and use
it for their own benefit or benefit of their friends, relatives and/or
    caste.Being responsible for your own self and to the power you are    designated with is very important. No system works effectively if all the    designated  members do not perform their duties effectively and in a
 coordinated manner.
3. Believe in People’s Knowledge and Experience
All people have experience and knowledge. It needs to be respected and
valued while making any decision. Never view people as empty vessels needing17to be filled with knowledge. They should not be viewed as passive recipients.
They need to be active in sharing their views while making decisions. Forexample, if pregnant women are not coming forward to get their namesregistered you will need to find out why they are not coming. Ask them tosuggest strategies to increase registration of pregnant women and how theycould contribute to making the strategy work.
4. Values of Trust
When people honour each other, there is a trust established that leads tosynergy, interdependence and mutual respect. Gaining the trust of thosearound you is not a difficult or unachievable task. Trust can be created bysharing feelings, thoughts, views and being transparent. Trust is a glue thatholds people together.
Some of the values promoted by Mahatma Gandhi
zAlways speak the truth
zBelieve in the power of non-violence
zA person should not be discriminated against on the basis of her or his
caste, religion, sex, class or ethnicity. Everyone should be treated as ahuman being.
zIf you have made a mistake never be ashamed to apologise or expressregret and ask for forgiveness.
zNever misuse common resources like land, water, forests, wood, etc. Itbelongs to every individual on earth and all should have equal  access tothese resources.
zYou can touch the heart of people if you are committed to serve them.
zKeep people at the centre of your activities and believe in the power ofpeople.
It is a fact that people who are conscious of their value-based priorities are
more fulfilled and happier in their lives. They make more effective decisionsabout their own and their family and community’s growth and development.To know your personal values is to be more aware of who you are, what you
want and what you don’t want.
As an ASHA, your work is very important. With that you should also value your
family and community. You also need to think about what is more importantto you and why. Answering these questions for yourself can be revealing. Insome situations the family may be important and in some it may be thework. One is actually a means to another. Working together may enable you
to support your family, providing you an opportunity to develop. Having a
family may provide support to your work. Understanding your values enablesyou to move ahead and maintain a balanced and fulfilling lifestyle.18
Understanding the
Human Rights andthe Fundamental
Rights
Every individual needs to have knowledge about their Human and their
Fundamental Rights. Usually we do not come across information on this topic.Also, in the past you may not have discussed this topic with others. As anASHA you need to know about rights. It will help you to learn about your andyour community’s rights. It will also help you to take appropriate decisions forthe development of your community. You may be reading about Fundamental
and Human Rights for the  first time and you may find the information
boring. We urge you to read this chapter. We have tried to make theinformation  simple, interesting and relevant.
Think of some time in the past when you felt hurt because someone did not
respect you. These include things people may have said about you to makeyou feel stupid or silly. For example, some one may have told you, “There is
no use talking to you, you will not understand.” Try and remember one or two
such hurtful statements/incidents.  
In 1948, after the global suffering in World War II, all the countries in the
world agreed that it would be a more peaceful world if every human beingrespected the dignity of every other human being. As a result, the UniversalHuman Right Declaration came in existence. Our country has also agreed to
this Declaration.19This the set of the Universal Human Rights.
zAll human beings are born free and equal.  
zEveryone should have the same rights and freedom, no matter of what
race, sex, or colour she or he may be. It should not matter where wewere born, what language we speak or what religion or political opinions
we have, or whether we are rich or poor.
zEveryone has the right to live, to be free and to feel safe.
zAdult men and women have the right to marry and start a family, without
anyone trying to stop them because of their race, country or religion.Both have to agree to the marriage and both have equal rights in getting
married, during the marriage, and if and when they decide to end it.
zYou may believe what you want to believe, have ideas about right and
wrong, and believe in any religion you want, and you may change yourreligion if you want, without interference.
The entire list of Human Rights is long and we shall not be discussing it here.
Let us now understand what are the Fundamental Rights.
The Fundamental Rights
As an Indian, our county has granted us six Fundamental Rights. They are:
zRight to Equality
zRight to Freedom
zRight against Exploitation
zRight to Freedom of Religion
zCultural and Educational Rights
zRight to Constitutional Remedies
Let us understand these rights in detail.
The Right to Equality
The state cannot discriminate against a citizen on the basis of race, caste,
sex, religion or place of birth. The state also cannot discriminate againstanyone in matters of employment. All citizens can apply for government jobs.But the Right to Equality specifies certain expectations. The Constitution has
a special provision in the form of reserve posts while guaranteeing the Right
to Equality. Reserved posts are provided for scheduled castes, scheduled tribesand other backward classes. Similarly, special provisions are provided forwomen and children.
The main reason for having these exceptions is that in our society various
kinds of inequalities still exist. You must have noticed how people become
victims of unequal treatment. Extending such protections does not contradict20the spirit of the Right to Equality. Such a policy is known as ‘Positive
Discrimination’ or a ‘Protective Discrimination’ policy.
Right to Freedom
The Right to Freedom is a cluster of the following six freedoms:
Freedom of speech and expression
Freedom to assemble peacefully and without armsFreedom to form associations or unions
Freedom to move freely throughout the territory of India
Freedom to live and settle in any part of IndiaFreedom to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or
business.
The aim of the Right to Freedom is the development of a person. She/he
should enjoy her/his rights democratically, and She/he should be able to live a
healthy and civic life. This right is very crucial for democracy.
Right Against Exploitation
When we accept everyone as human, we cannot treat anyone as a ‘slave’.
She/he cannot be kept in captivity. She/he cannot be forced into labour.Citizens are protected against such exploitation by the law. Earlier there waspractice of bonded or forced labour. Sometimes such traditions were carriedon for generations. The forced labour system has now been abolished.
Practice of  this system is a crime which is punishable by law.
In the same way, if children below the age of 14 years are asked to do work
beyond their capacity, and if they are employed in factories, mines or suchhazardous places, it is called exploitation and is a crime under the Abolition ofChild Labour Act.
Right to Freedom of Religion
The Right to freedom of religion provides religious freedom to all the citizens
of India. All religions are equal before the state and no religion can be given
preference over the other by the state.
However, religious freedom also has to be observed under certain limitations.
The state can regulate the non-religious activities of any religious communityin the interest of public order, morality and health.
Cultural and Educational Rights
India is a country of multiple religions, languages and cultures. Any community
which has a language and script of its own, has the right to conserve and
develop them. All minorities, religious or linguistic groups, can set up their21own educational institutions. In doing so, they may preserve and develop their
own culture.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
This right empowers citizens to approach the court in cases of denial of anyof the Fundamental Rights. The court of law stands as a guard against theviolation of these rights.
Under this right, it is the duty of the Judiciary to attend to all complaints
pertaining to violation or rights.
Directive Principles
Apart from these there are some Directive Principles of State Policy that
incorporate such rights as are required for the overall development of human
kind.
zThese Principles include rights like the right to work, right to equal wage
for equal work, right to an adequate livelihood, right to free and
compulsory education of children up to the age of 14 years etc.
zThe state should take measures to preserve the good health of labourersand minor children and to ensure that they are not forced to undertake
any work that harms their health.
zThe state should promote public health and animal husbandry.
zDecentralisation of power should reach the grassroots level. For that,
Panchayati Raj must be established.
zThe state should protect the academic and economic benefits of theweaker sections. Not only that, various programmes should be undertaken
for the development of these people. In addition to that, free legal
assistance should be extended to the economically weaker sections of
society to help get them justice.
Think about the following statements and decide whether your Human and
community’s Fundamental Rights are protected.
zMy village is safe and secure.  All members of the community receive equaltreatment and information about different government schemes and
opportunities so as to avail of these services.
zMy village provides all its inhabitants equal access to resources, especially
water, irrespective of their caste, sex and religion.
zWhenever someone violates the rights of another person, the villagecommittee takes note of it, discusses and takes appropriate decision andaction with the consent of all the committee members, keeping in view the
policies and procedures of the committee.22zAll members of the village are allowed to attend the Gram Panchayat.
Are your attending the Gram Panchayat?
zNo one in your village is subjected to degrading treatment or punishment.
zMy village Panchayat has people from diverse backgrounds, religion andcultures. There are some women members in our Panchayat. There are33% seats reserved in the Panchayat for women.
zI can express my  political, religious and cultural ideas and beliefs to myfamily and community without fear of discrimination.
zMembers of my village actively participate in decision-making processesrelated to village and community development through the village GramSabha.
zThe village members and labourers are paid as per minimum wage norms.
zBoth men and women are paid equal wages for equal work.
23
Understanding
the Meaningof the Rightto Health
We have discussed the meaning of Human Rights and Fundamental Rights.
This discussion was conducted to have basic information on rights. Now we
need to discuss the meaning of the Right to Health. As an ASHA you need tohave knowledge about your right to health. This will help you to mobilise acommunity to access its entitlements and be vigilant. Your understanding ofthe Right to Health will help you to take action to access health care servicesfrom the Public Health System.
Let us first understand the meaning of the Right to Health.
Right to Health Means
zThere should be public healthcare facilities in place with adequate
amount of drugs and equipment. This facility needs to be functionaland implementing comprehensive and gender sensitive health programmes
zHealth facilities and services have to be accessible to everyone
without any discrimination.
zNobody should be refused treatment on the basis of religion, caste,
economic status, gender, etc.
zThe public health facility should be located such that it can be reached at
the earliest convenience.
zThe health services should be affordable for the majority of the people.24zThe public health services should be available free of cost.
zInformation about the services available should be accessible to community
members irrespective of their caste/class/religion/sex. They should beaware about their entitlements from the Public Health System.
zAll health services should be gender-sensitive and address an individual’slife-cycle needs and requirements.
zHealth facilities and services must be scientifically and medicallyappropriate and of good quality.
Answer the following questions to know whether or not your community’s
rights to health are protected:
zIs the health service available free of cost to all the community members
through the Public Health System?
zDoes your ANM visit your village regularly and visit all the area of yourcommunity to provide free health services?
zIs the health facility located at a place which can be reached easily?
zIs the health service financially affordable for the  majority of the people inthe community?
zIs the community aware about all the health services and entitlements that
they can avail of from the Public Health System?
zIs the community aware of the maternal benefit schemes like Janani
Suraksha Yojana (JSY) or any other health schemes being implemented bythe government?
If the answers to these questions are “NO”, it means that your community’s
Right to Health is not protected. If your community members have to pay for
the health services from the Public Health System, their Right to Health is not
protected. As an ASHA, if you do not know the answer to the abovementioned questions, get the information from the community by discussingthese matters with them. You are a critical link between the community andthe Health Facility. To exercise the  community’s Right to Health you alsoneed to monitor, identify gaps and articulate their health care needs to the
appropriate health care providers. Therefore, you need to be well aware of
the health structure, systems and its operational issues and standards.
Different health services are available at various levels. Let us first learn
about them. Usually the health services are available at the state, district,cluster and village levels.
Village level
At the village level there is a Sub-Centre. It provides the following health
services under various programmes:25Reproductive and Child Health Programme (RCH). Under this programme the
following services are provided.
Maternal health
zAntenatal care
zIntra-natal care
zPostnatal care
zEssential newborn care
zJanani Suraksha Yojana (JSY)
zNutrition counselling and referral
Child health
zImmunisation
zVitamin A
Refer to ASHA Book 2 for details on maternal and child health care services
Family welfare
zPromotion and supply of contraceptives
zIUD insertions
zFollow-up services for permanent methods
zCounselling
Adolescent health
zAdolescent-friendly health support and referral
Refer to ASHA Book 3 for details on contraceptives and adolescent health
services
Community at large
zPreventive and prompt referral action for Malaria, Dengue, Chikun Guniea,
Japanese Encephalitis, Kala Azar, Filariasis, and communicable diseases,
and in the control of epidemics.
zTreatment for minor ailments such as ordinary fever , diarrhea/ dysentery
/vomiting, worms infestation and first aid.
zAppropriate and prompt referral to the nearest Primary Health Centre
(PHC) or Community Health Centre (CHC) if the patient is in a critical
condition.
zDisease surveillance and reporting for all National Health Programmes and
endemic diseases.
Other supportive structure at the village level is the Integrated Child
Development Scheme (ICDS), which provides early childhood care and
development and monitoring, nutrition supplementation for pregnant andlactating women and children below six years and partial Day-Care(creche)for four hours.26Cluster Level
At the cluster level there is a Primary Health Centre (PHC). It provides the
same health services as that provided by the Sub-Centre, alongwith thefollowing services:
zFirst aid and appropriate management for injuries and accidents andstabilisation of the patient before referral/discharge.
Reproductive Child Health (RCH) related services
z24-hour services for both normal and assisted deliveries. First aid and
referral for serious obstetric emergencies.
zNewborn care.
zEmergency care of sick children.
zIntegrated management of neonatal and childhood Illnesses (IMNCI)
zSpacing and permanent methods of family planning and follow-up
zAbortion services limited to counselling and early term Medical Terminationof Pregnancy (MTP) using Manual Vacuum Aspiration (MVA) technique(Wherever trained personnel and facility exist).
National Health Programmes
zDiagnosis and treatment of RTI/STIs, and of major illnesses targeted under
   the National Health Programmes-Tuberculosis (TB), Blindness, Malaria,
   Microfilaria, Dengue and HIV screening.
zRoutine lab tests related to blood sputum, urine, stool examination and
for TB, Malaria, HIV, Typhoid, Syphillis, Reproductive Tract Infection,
   Sexually Transmitted Diseases (RTI/STDs).
zFirst-level action in unusual health events and out-break situations.
zSpecial operation camps for vasectomy, tubectomy, MTP , hydrocelectomy
and cataract surgeries.
z Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH)
treatment other than through Allopathic system, as per the local people’spreference.
zSupport to School Health Program through regular check-ups andappropriate treatment.
zEarly detection of disabilities, initial intervention and referral.
zDrinking water tests and purification.27Block Level
Community Health Centres (CHCs) are located at the block level. They provide
services similar to that provided by PHCs, in addition to the following healthservices:
zWell-equipped medium-sized hospital to handle emergencies related to
Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) and National Health Programmes.
zSpecialist treatment of endemic diseases like Dengue, Hemorrhagic fever,
Cerebral Malaria, etc.
zRoutine surgical procedures and simple operations.
zEssential and emergency obstetric care, and 24-hour services for normal
and assisted deliveries.
zSpecialised Family Planning (FP) services, Laproscopic, Gynaecological andsafe abortion services.
zCounselling and treatment of RTI/STIs.
zBasic routine pathological tests with advanced tests for some diseasesas blood transfusion, and testing and treatment of drinking water sources.
zPreventing/managing epidemics and outbreaks.
State Level
At state-level policies, plans and programmes are formulated based on theinformation and research regarding the health needs and problems of the
people. Appropriate budgets for those services, materials and human
resources are allocated.
Quality of care: Now you know about the health services which are available
at these different levels. As an ASHA you need to be well-versed with servicesavailable at the Sub-Centre and the PHC. Knowing only about the services isalso not enough. Under the Rural Health Mission great emphasis is being put
on the quality of health care. As an ASHA you need to make sure that your
community members receive quality health care. There are certain normswhich need to be followed by the health service providers and health careservice institutions provide quality care to patients. Generally, patients do notknow about these. As a result, they often get poor quality services.
Quality Health Care is a Right of the Community
zA professionally trained and certified person has to take history and
examine the patient.
zThe patient is to be given appropriate/adequate information related to the
diagnosis, treatment procedures and drugs prescribed without scaringor causing undue tension.28zThe patient needs to be given time to share concerns. After listening to
them, help them to make an informed decision regarding their treatmentand any procedure (risk and safety factors) and choose the most suitablealternative if there is a choice available.
zThe essential equipment, supplies and technical staff must be availableat the facility. Patient/s must not be told that due to unavailability
of drugs or equipment being out of order s/he cannot receive the
necessary service.
zPrivacy, comfort, confidentiality, and dignity of the patient are to bemaintained- have curtains in examination rooms, allow the patient’srelatives and family to  accompany her/him, if desired, and keepregisters/files locked.
zBehaviour of the health care providers need to be courteous,non-discriminatory and reassuring.
zPatient must feel motivated enough by the health care providers and thesystem to continue and complete the treatment.
zAppropriate and adequate treatment is be given.
It is very important that you visit your nearby sub-center and PHC regularly to
learn whether these centres are providing quality basic health services. Your
visit needs to be well-planned. We have given a checklist in Annexure 1, whichyou should carry while visiting these centres. Observe the aspects mentionedin this checklist. If you observe that the PHC and sub-centre are not providingquality health care services you have a right to discuss the same with themedical officer in-charge and the ANM. If you do not get proper responses
from them you can go to the Block Health Officer or Chief Medical Officer
and bring your concerns to their notice. Make a note of the names of all thepeople with whom you speak.29Annexure 1
Observation Checklist
Observation Checklist for sub–centreThe participants need to collect the following informationI. General Information
Name of the sub-centres village_____________Total population covered by the sub-centre_____________
Distance from the PHC _____________
II. Availability of staff at the sub-centre
Is there an ANM available/appointed at the centre? Yes/NoIs there health worker-male (MPW) available/appointed? Yes/NoIs there a part-time attendant (female) available? Yes/No
III. Availability of Infrastructure at the sub-centre
zIs there a designated government building available for the sub-centre?
Yes/No
zIs the building in working condition? Yes/No
zIs there a regular water supply at this sub-centre? Yes/No
zIs there regular electricity supply at this sub-centre? Yes/No
zIs the blood pressure apparatus in working condition in this sub-centre?
Yes/No
zIs the examination table in working condition in this sub-centre? Yes/No
zIs the steriliser instrument in working condition in this sub-centre? Yes/No
zIs the weighing machine in working condition in this sub-centre? Yes/No
zAre there disposable delivery kits available in this sub-centre? Yes /No
IV. Availability of Services at the sub-centre
zDoes the doctor visit the sub-centre at least once a month? Yes/No
zIs the day and time of this visit fixed? Yes/No
zIs facility for delivery available in this sub-centre during a full 24-hour
period? Yes/No
zIs treatment of diarrhoea and dehydration offered by the sub-centre?Yes/No
zIs treatment for minor illness like fever, cough, cold, etc. available in thissub-centre? Yes/No30zIs facility for taking a  blood slide in the case of fever for detection of
malaria available in this sub-centre? Yes/No
zAre contraceptive services available at this sub-centre? Yes/No
zAre oral contraceptive pills distributed through this sub-centre? Yes/No
zAre condoms distributed through the sub-centre? Yes/No
Observation Checklist for PHC Centre
I. General Information
zName of the PHC village _____________
zTotal population covered by the PHC_____________
zIs there a designated government building available for the PHC? Yes/ No
zIs the building in working condition? Yes/No
zIs water supply readily available in this PHC? Yes /No
zIs electricity supply readily available in this PHC? Yes/No
zIs there a telephone line available and in working condition?
II. Availability of Staff in the PHC
Is a Medical Officer available/appointed at the centre? Yes/NoIs a Staff Nurse available at the PHC? Yes/No
Is a health educator available at the PHC? Yes/No
Is a health worker-male(MPW) available/appointed? Yes/NoIs a part time attendant (female) available? Yes/No
III General Services1. Availability of medicines in the PHC
zIs the anti-snake venom readily available in the PHC? Yes/No
zIs the anti-rabies vaccine readily available in the PHC? Yes/No
zAre drugs for malaria readily available in the PHC? Yes/No
zAre drugs for tuberculosis readily available in the PHC? Yes/No
2. Availability of curative services
zIs cataract surgery done in this PHC? Yes/No
zIs primary management of wounds done at this PHC? (stitches, dressing
   etc. Yes/No
zIs primary management of fracture done at this PHC? Yes/No31zAre minor surgeries done at this PHC? Yes/No
zIs primary management of cases of poisoning done at the PHC? Yes/No
zIs primary management of burns done at the PHC? Yes/No
IV Reproductive and Maternal Care and Abortion Services1. Availability of reproductive and maternal health services
zAre ante-natal clinics regularly organised by this PHC? Yes/No
zIs facility for normal delivery available in the PHC 24 hours a day? Yes/No
zAre facilities for tubectomy and vasectomy available at the PHC? Yes/No
zAre internal examination and treatment for gynaecological conditions
and disorders like leucorrhoea and menstrual disturbance available at thePHC? Yes/No
2. Is facility for abortion- Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP)available at
this PHC? Yes/No
3. Is treatment for anaemia given to both pregnant as well as non-pregnant
women? Yes/No
4. How many deliveries have been conducted in the last quarter (three
months)? _____________
V Child Care and Immunisation Services
1. Are low birth-weight babies treated at this PHC? Yes/No
2. Are there fixed immunisation days? Yes/No/No information
3. Are BCG and measles vaccine given at this PHC? Yes/No4. Is treatment for children with pneumonia available at this PHC? Yes/No5. Is treatment of children suffering from diarrhoea with severe
dehydration done at this PHC? Yes/No
VI Laboratory and Epidemic Management Services
1. Is laboratory service available at the PHC?
zIs blood examination for anaemia done at this PHC?— Yes/No
zIs detection of malaria parasite by blood smear examination done at this
PHC? Yes/No
zIs sputum examination to diagnose tuberculosis conducted at this PHC?
   Yes/No
zIs urine examination of pregnant women done at this PHC? Yes/No
Ref: Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS)32
Whenever we think of a leader , who comes to mind first? It may be a great
freedom fighter , a popular politician or a renowned religious guru. All thesepeople have some common qualities, they alter a challenging situation or a
problem into an opportunity.
Leadership can be defined as mobilising people and resources towards
achieving valued goals. Through knowledge and experience most people have
the potential to become a leader in any given situation.
Effective leadership in the community requires skills like team building,
communication, conflict resolution, negotiation and advocacy for change.
As an ASHA you often have to play the role of a leader. Hence it is important
to understand the meaning of leadership and qualities, which will help you in
playing your leadership roles effectively.
Leadership means
zto be responsible
zto inspire people to follow you
zto be non-judgemental with people and transparent in your actions
zto show confidence, assertiveness, enthusiasm, passion and accountability
zto have skills for getting things done in cooperation with others
Leadership33Gandhiji was a great leader. He took people along with him to achieve freedom
for our country. Let us see the principles that he followed as a leader.
Courage: Courage to stand up and be accountable for your beliefs
and opinions
If your community’s Right to Health is violated, as an ASHA you need to have
courage to bring it to the notice of the concerned stakeholders. For example,if the ANM is not coming to your village regularly or she is not visiting thehouses of socially backward families have courage to tell her that you havenoted her absence and you will take the necessary steps if this continues. If
she does not listen, be ready to inform the Sarpanch, SHG members and even
the medical officer. Continue your efforts till you ensure that she  visits all thepeople in your village regularly.
Responsibility:  Carry out your role and responsibility honestly
As a leader you need to be responsible, first person for your self and then foryour community. As an ASHA you are given specific roles and responsibilities.You should inform your community of these. This will prove useful in two
ways:
zIf they are aware about your roles they will be able to bring it to your
notice if you are not performing it effectively.
zThey will also support you in carrying out your roles and responsibilitiesmore effectively
Encouragement: Invite the community to join you in availing of their
right to quality health care
Every individual needs encouragement. As a leader, whenever you meet
anyone read the unwritten words on their forehead “I am important.”
Encouragement comes by involving community members in the process whenavailing for them their entitlements from the public health system or bygiving them some responsibility to improve the health environment in thecommunity.
Improvement: Constantly enhancing your competencies
As a leader, an ASHA should constantly improve her knowledge and skills. Be
aware of any new decision made regarding the delivery of health services and
any new schemes declared. Be in constant dialogue with the ANM as she is agood source of information. Your skills will improve by practising them. Youmay fail too. From failures you learn what should not be done. If you arerepeating your mistakes it means that you are not learning. By learning youwill be able to stand out.34Leadership Style
People adopt different leadership styles. The two common styles are
zAuthoritarian
zParticipatory
Authoritarian leaders do not come forward for cooperation or collaboration.
They are heavily task-oriented people. They expect people to do what they
are told without question or debate. They  are usually intolerant of what they
do not agree with. It is difficult for community members to contribute theirviews or empower themselves under this kind of leadership.
A participatory leader creates a positive environment in which all members
can reach their highest potential. They encourage the community to reachthe set goals as effectively as possible, while also working tirelessly to
strengthen the bonds among various members. They usually form and lead
some of the most productive teams.
As an ASHA, it is the most appropriate to adopt a participatory leadership
style. Some of the characteristics of participatory leadership are given below:
Leaders establish goals and set the direction
As an ASHA you need to articulate what is an achievable goal in your village.You should establish your goal and direction by involving your community as to
how, where and when it would be completed.
For example, there should not be any maternal death in the coming year in
your village, or, All children of your village should be immunised in the next sixmonths.
Leaders affirm and articulate values
As leaders we need to have certain values like honesty, hardwork,trusteworthiness etc. You have to demonstrate these values in your actions.
You may communicate to your community members that you are hardworking
but if you do not show it in your actions people will not believe you.
For example, you are aware that every eligible child in the village needs to be
fully immunised. But when the ANM comes for immunisation you are notpresent.Then will people believe that you are a hardworking person?
Leaders have high standards and high expectations
As an ASHA you should be firm about receiving high quality health care
services from the sub-centre and the PHC for your village community.
Make sure that the ANM performs her role professionally. As an ASHA you
should also provide her support to carry out her role effectively. For example,35inform the community about the date and place of the health camp or day of
visit of the ANM and encourage them to be present at the camp.
If the health service provider ill-treats a community member, take a note of
it and confront the person concerned.
Leaders are accountable and responsible
As an ASHA you are accountable, both to the community and the health careprovider. Be an effective link between both of them by sharing information
from one end to the other.
Some tips to be accountable:
zYou will gain personal power and the ability to get results if you assume
accountability in all situations, even if you do not immediately see theresults.
zComplain only to the person who can do something about it.
zConcentrating on blaming others or complaining will reduce your energyand the energy of people around you.
zVenting your feelings once or twice is a good stress managementtechnique. Being constantly critical of them has no positive outcome.
“Focus on action and not on blame”
“If it is to be, it is up to me”“Light a candle instead of cursing the darkness ”
Ultimately, you are the one responsible for yourself. You play a crucial part in
every situation in your life. What you are today is a result of your choice. This
is accountability.
Leaders involve others in decision-making
As a leader you have to make various decisions. A community leader rarelymakes a decision alone. By law, a decision, which affects the communityneeds to be taken along with the community members. The community needsto feel  ownership of decisions taken. Only then they will do their best to
achieve what they have decided.
For example, as an ASHA you have to articulate and assert yourself for your
community’s health needs. You need to decide and prioritise the health needsof the community along with community members and jointly develop a planof action. This will encourage them to join hands with you to take necessaryaction.
Leaders motivates others
To achieve the goal of the Right to Health you need the support of your36community members, the Panchayat, SHG etc. As a leader, you need to
motivate your community to join hands with you. Motivation comes through
zBeing in regular contact with them
zSharing necessary information regularly
zGiving them responsibility
zThanking them for their support
zGiving them credit for their efforts
z Appreciating them honestly in public
Leaders achieve unity
As a leader you need to promote unity among your community members andbetween the community members and health care providers. Unity can be
achieved by listening to everyone’s points of view while taking decisions. Do
not make anyone feel neglected since later they may become difficult personsto manage.
Unity comes when community members feel the ownership of the goal that
you have set as an ASHA for your village.
Leaders serve as  role models
Leaders have followers. Therefore, it is very important that all your actions
are responsible.
For example, as an ASHA you are assigned the role of accompanying a
pregnant woman for a referral. If you performed this role and saved the lifeof woman in your village, you have set an example. Next time, when the
need arises, other community members will come forward to accompany a
pregnant woman during an emergency. They may also arrange for money and
transport, if required.
Leader listen and explain
Listening helps to make the process of decision-making easier and more
meaningful. Also, the as a leader you  need to articulate and explain your
point of view.
For example, at the village level families are not proactive in preparing for
the birth of a child. You need to listen to them about the reasons for theirlack of motivation. Based on their views, explain to them the need for birth
preparedness and the likely consequences of poor birth preparedness. Share
positive examples where birth preparedness has helped to save a woman’s
life.37Leaders represent the community
A leader is the face of the community. As an ASHA, when you discuss the
health concerns of your community with the health service provider, you arerepresenting your community. Share their points of view rather than merelyyours.
For example, you have to develop a comprehensive village health plan along
with the Panchayat and health and sanitation committee. While developing a
plan you need to share the concerns of the poorest of the poor of your
community. Share their feelings and opinions, and make sure that whateverdecision is taken to develop the health plan, reflects their voices. If somesegment of the community has shared that the source of  drinking water isnot accessible to them, it should become a point of discussion whiledeveloping a comprehensive health plan for the village.
As a leader some of the skills you need to build are
zCommunication
zDecision-making
zNegotiation
zCoordination
38
God gave us a mouth and two ears to communicate
People failing to communicate create confusion, frustration and problems.
Communication is the exchange or two-way flow of information and ideas
between two or more persons.
Communication is the most important skill to fulfill your role as an  ASHA.
There are different forms of communication
zVerbal communication
zNon-verbal communication
zWritten communication
As an ASHA you need to use all three types of communication.
Verbal communication
This is the most common mode of communication used. Normally, we think
communication is completed once we have orally delivered the message. Butthat is not true. Chances are that the message was not received properly. Toknow if your message was received properly, ask the person whether she/heunderstood the message and take feedback. In short, effective
communication is two-way. One-way communication is usually not effective.
Communication
Skills39Some Tips for Effective Verbal Communication
zAccuracy
zClarity
zCorrectness
Points to take care of while communicating:
zMaintain eye contact with the person with whom you are talking.
zBe confident while communicating. Stand or sit confidently.
zStick to the point so that you do not end up using too much time.
zBe specific, sincere, honest and direct while  communicating
zShare feelings while communicating.
zBe open-minded. This will help you to understand the other person’s point
    of view.
zYour voice should be loud enough so that everyone can hear you. Your
pronunciation should be clear. Use words which are easy to understand. Do
    not use technical words or jargon.
zIf someone has something worth mentioning, give them scope to do so.Never forget to compliment/appreciate others.
The speaker is assured that you are listening when you use verbal affirmations
like, “I see,” I” agree”, “uh, okay, then….” during the conversation at
appropriate points.
Non-Verbal Communication
We all know that communication is not only about words and languages. Evensilence communicates and eyes talk. Hence, it is important to understandthese forms of communication which are referred to as non-verbalcommunication.
Here are some non-verbal behavioural aspects which require extra attention.
zEye contact : Looking at the person with whom you are talking is an
effective way of declaring that you are sincere/honest about what you aresaying and also communicates confidence.
zBody posture : The value or weight of your messages will increase if
you face the person, stand or sit appropriately close and hold your head erect.
zFacial expressions : Express appropriate feelings on your face. Effective
communication requires supporting facial expressions.
zGestures:  Use of hand gestures to describe and emphasise adds value but
it should not be overdone in excitement or anxiety.
zVoice characteristics : The volume, tone, speed of speech and pitch should
be well modulated.40Active Listening is Communication too
All of us can hear, but all of us cannot listen. Hearing and listening are not the
same. Hearing is involuntary, while listening involves the reception andinterpretation of what is heard. It decodes the sound heard meaningfully.Does a knock on the door sound the same all the time? What if you are aloneand you hear a knock late at night? What happens if you hear a knock whenyou are expecting someone whom you like?
Active listening involves listening with a purpose. It may be to gain
information, obtain directions, understand others, solve problems, shareinterests, see how the other person feels, or even show support. This type oflistening takes the same amount of, or more, energy than speaking. Itrequires the listener to hear various messages, understand the meaning andthen verify the meaning by offering feedback, or confirming by paraphrasing
what was heard.
Following are some of the tips for good listening:
zMaintain eye contact
zSit or stand in a receptive position, lean forward
zEncourage by using  positive gestures and words
zRemove distractions
zUnderstand non-verbal signals
zStop talking or doing what you were doing before you began listening
zGive time for listening
zDo not pass judgments or criticise mid-way while some one is speaking
zReflect on the feeling  expressed and paraphrase what has been heard
zHave patience
As an ASHA, keep the following points in mind while communicating with your
community.
zNever discriminate on the basis of caste and class while communicatingwith the community. Your tone and gesture should not change while talkingto socially and economically disadvantaged community members. Talk tothem with respect and dignity.
zA community has immense knowledge and experience. Give people achance to share and use it. Do not treat them like empty vessels.
zNever make any comment which emphasises gender inequality. Yourcommunication should be gender-sensitive.
zDo not react fast. Listen, assimilate, analyse and then react.41As an ASHA, you need to keep the following points in
mind while communicating with stakeholders
zGive due respect to all the stakeholders, whether they are from the
    community or from the health care system.
zWhile sharing information with the stakeholders, make sure that you
    prepare with the necessary information, data  and evidence. Never
    generalise the information. Be very specific about what you want or do not
    want from them, what you want to change and what you want to    continue.
zBe calm while communicating. Do not show your anxiety.
zDo not use a blaming tone.
You will be surprised by how a simple smile and humility will
affect those around you. And, of course, confidence and
assertiveness will help get your message through. A point to
note – think before you speak. 
Written Communication
As an ASHA you would need to write applications and letters to the authorities
to improve access to health care services. You also need to document theprocesses and decisions taken during meetings. Let us first learn how to write
simply and effectively. Read the following letter:
Dear Sir,
There are many women in villages in different areas, which is far away
from the place where the ANC clinic is organised. Especially in thesummer season, the women cannot travel long distances to the clinicand hence cannot get their ANC check-ups done. If the clinic can be
conducted in two areas on different dates all women can come there and
benefit.I request this on behalf of all the community women.
Thank you
ASHA
Village name
Do you clearly understand what the letter is about?
It is a well-intended effort to bring to the notice of the person concerned the
conditions that deprive the village women of the  ANC’s services and also42suggests solutions to overcome this problem. But since it is not clear and
specific, it does not seem to be effective.
The letter can be made more effective if it includes the following details:Before starting to write an application/letter, every writer should ask1. Do I know what I want to say the (the subject)?2. Do I know to whom I am writing?
3. Do I know why I am  writing?
Read the same letter given below and see the difference between the first
letter and the second.
To                                                                         Date
___________(Name and address)___________
___________
Sub: request to organise MAMTA Day at two locations in the villageDear CDHO (write the name of the concerned person):I am working as ASHA for the village ________ of________ Block. My village
has a population of ________ . The houses are scattered across the areas.
The ANM regularly comes and organises MAMTA Day. However, it is
organised at a place which is not accessible for all the pregnant women.
A large number of women living on the other side of the village, are notable to attend the antenatal clinic, due to the distance.
I suggest that the antenatal clinic may be conducted in two places of the
village on different dates. I had a discussion about the same with theANM. She informed me that she needs permission from you. I request you
to look into this matter. As an ASHA I take the responsibility to bring all
the pregnant women so they have their antenatal check-up. You arewelcome to visit our village.
Thank you.
Yours sincerely,
ASHA (write name of ASHA and the village)43There are many points to be kept in view in order to convey our messages
correctly and precisely. The principles of writing include several do’s anddon’ts
Some Do’s1. Address it to the appropriate person2. Check that the letter has a date and reference
3. Keep sentences short
4. Use simple and familiar words instead of complex and unfamiliar ones5. Do not be vague and mention the reference points for clarity6. Never assume that the reader is aware of the facts and would understand
them.
7. Review your writing to add any missing points
8. Write and re-write the letter to get the essence correctly.
9. Explain facts through evidence and examples10.The letter should flow logically from one point to another11.Write with a view to express and not to impress
Some Don’ts
1. Avoid unnecessary words
2. Avoid incomplete and irrelevant arguments
3. Do not use ambiguous sentences and universal negatives
44
Each decision that we make  has a consequence and a level of impact. Even a
small decision has the potential to drastically change the course of our lives.All of us can recall some such decisions taken personally or by others whichhave left an important impact. Decision-making is a learned skill and must bepracticed consciously to  strengthen it.
As an ASHA you would often require to take some decisions, which will effect
the community at large. Hence, it is very important for you to master theskill of participatory decision-making by involving the community at all levels.
There are some basic steps of decision-making which need to be followed:
Define the Problem
Look at the situation carefully and examine it from all perspectives to find
out the actual problem.
For example, you have observed frequent occurence of malaria in the village,
affecting the basic health status of the people, especially women andchildren.  Malaria seems to be the problem and needs to be eradicated.However, the root problem is drainage water coming out of every housecollecting near  residential areas and schools.
 Decision-Making
Skills45To eradicate malaria completely you need to
mobilise people and think of solutions to
control the drainage problem.
Gather Information
Once the problem is identified, collect all the necessary information, seek
advice from the appropriate authority and involve the community. Use allavailable resources in a way to amicably solve this issue.
Think of Alternatives
At this stage of decision-making you need to arrange a community meetingand discuss the situation with people with whom you have worked with to
collect information regarding the problem. You may also present this in the
Gram Sabha. What is important is that people accept and understand theproblem. Later, alternative solutions may be suggested.
In participatory decision-making, it is very important that the community
owns the problem and feels responsible towards solving it.
Moreover, unless people accept the solution, it cannot be achieved on a
permanent basis.
Choose an Alternative
Part of effective decision-making is the ability to select one good alternative
from the various options available. This can be done through consensus of thecommunity and approval, of the authorities. To gain consensus and approvalyou would need to discuss it in the village meetings, the Gram Sabha,Panchayat meetings etc.
Before selecting the right alternative, assess all available options. It is
important to be practical in taking a decision.
Put the Decisions to Work
An effective decision is one which can be put into action. Thus,implementation is very important. During this process, keep checking if it ismoving towards the expected solution, and if there is something else whichneeds to be addressed.
Nobody is an expert in every skill.They can be mastered only through
practice. Hence, decision-making skills can also be sharpened throughexperience and practice.
But one needs to be confident and prepared to take responsibility if the
decision fails. This is part of the learning process. Accepting responsibility foryour actions is a very important quality and a sign of maturity.46How to Handle Difficult Situations
If you are finding it difficult to take a decision, take a short break and then
continue. After the break ask the group member/s to restate the issue andreview the options. It is also may be a good idea to adjourn and let peoplethink about it overnight.
Description of an Effective Decision
zAn effective decision should not leave any unhappy feelingamong group members after the meeting has beenadjourned.
zAn effective decision can be translated into reality. It shouldnot be decision impossible to put in action.
zAn effective decision can be lived with. It does not set up
    conflict of a debilitating nature among persons or groups.
zAn effective decision must involve the group enough for the
    members to implement the decision.
47
Although everyone negotiates informally all the time without even being
aware of it, formal negotiation is a skill that can be learned throughexperience and practice. People who negotiate a lot tend to be much moreskilled at it than people who have not participated in any formalnegotiation. Negotiation means dealing with differences between two or
more individuals or groups. As an ASHA you will have to deal with differences.
You have  to resolve these differences to achieve the larger goals of villagehealth programmes. Let us build an understanding of the process ofnegotiation.
Negotiating is the process by which two or more people/parties with different
needs and goals work to find a mutually acceptable solution to an issue.
Because negotiating is an inter-personal process, each negotiating situation is
different, and is influenced by each party’s skills, attitudes and style. Weoften look at negotiating as unpleasant because it implies conflict, butnegotiating need not be characterised by bad feelings or angry behavior.Understanding more about the negotiation process allows us to manage ournegotiations with confidence and increases the chance that the outcomes will
be positive for both parties.
Negotiations need not be confrontational by being offensive, insulting and
challenging. In fact, effective negotiation is characterised by  groups workingtogether to find a solution, rather than each group trying to WIN at any cost.Negotiation
Skills48Keep in mind that the attitude that you take in a negotiation (e.g, hostile or
cooperative) will set the tone for the interaction. If you are confrontational,you will have a fight on your hands.
Negotiating is a complex process but definitely one worth mastering. If you
keep in mind that you are responsible for the success or failure of the
negotiation, and if you follow the tips given here, you will find the process
easier.
We need to understand that in a successful negotiation everyone wins. The
objective should be agreement, not victory or to make the other party orperson feel low.
As an ASHA you will have to constantly negotiate with people and situations in
order to be able to fulfil your responsibility. It is important to realise that it is
quite a challenge to negotiate with people in authority but with enoughpreparation and practice you can deal effectively with any kind of  situationwhich requires negotiation.
Let us Understand the steps of Successful Negotiation
Ask for the other person’s perspective
In a negotiating situation use questions to find out what the other person’s
concerns and needs might be. Some examples of likely questions are: What do
you need from me on this? What are your concerns about what I amsuggesting/asking? When you hear the other person express their needs orconcerns, use appropriate listening responses to make sure you heardcorrectly.
State Your needs
In the process of negotiation the other person requires to know your needs.
It is very important to state not only what you need but also why you need it.
Prepare options beforehandBefore entering into a negotiating session, prepare some options that you can
suggest if your preferred solution is not acceptable. Anticipate why the other
person may resist your suggestion and be prepared to counter the same with
an alternative.
Do not argueNegotiating is about arriving at solutions. Arguing is about trying to prove the
other person wrong. We know that during negotiation each party tries toprove the other one wrong, no progress is made. Do not waste time in
arguing. If you disagree with something state your disagreement in a gentle,
but assertive, way. Do not demean the other person or get into a powerstruggle.49Consider timing
There are good times to negotiate and bad times. Bad times include those
situations where there is a high degree of anger on either side, apreoccupation with something else, a high level of stress or tiredness on oneside or the other. The best outcome for almost all negotiations is a win/win
situation when both parties walk away with a positive feeling about having
achieved their goals.
Suggestions for Effective Negotiation
While negotiating as an ASHA you must have unlimited patience. Never try tomake the opponent feel low and defeated. Emphathise with the other personto understand her/his perspective.
Be positive and open in your approach. Do not begin the discussion with any
set assumptions or negative feelings. Approach a negotiation with an attitude
of, “I accept you as an equal negotiating partner and respect your right tohave an opinion of your own.”You may think that this is being soft and noteffective, but this approach is a sign of internal strength and confidence.
50
Coordination
Skills
As an ASHA you are a link between health care services and the community.
Therefore, you are expected to regularly coordinate with various stakeholders
and  the community.
Aganwadi
worker
ANM
Sarpanch
SHG leader
Gram
mitrasTBAASHA
Youth leaderLeader of
milk
cooperativeSchool
teacher51You need to be aware of different ways of coordination and how to ensure
effective coordination. With effective coordination you will be able to improvethe health status of your community.
You need to coordinate with the health facilities to
zlearn about decisions taken at the PHC or at the Integrated Child
Development officers’ level
zshare your concerns regarding the access to health care and nutrition
services at the village level
zjointly plan health activities to get optimum outcome
zplan health camp at the village level and organise MAMTA Day
zset up mechanisms to ensure timely referrals for pregnant women
There are different ways of coordination. The most common way of
coordination is to meet the concerned person regularly and discuss the issueor share information. Another way of coordination is to call a meeting. Youmay need special skills for effective coordination. Let us understand them.
Each meeting needs to be productive. A productive meeting is well-planned
and result-oriented. Unproductive meetings are too long, vague in purpose,
poorly controlled and frustrating.
zDecide the agenda of the meeting. Decide who should be called. Invite only
those people who can contribute to the meeting and take follow-upactions.
zShare the agenda with the concerned persons. This is very critical. At the
village level there may be no need to send a written agenda, However you
need to clearly orally inform them about the purpose of the meeting andthe points, which need to be discussed.
zAt the beginning of the meeting, welcome all the participants. Make acircular sitting arrangement to enable an enriching conversation/dialogue.
zExplain the purpose of the meeting again and make sure that they all have
a common understanding. Jointly fix how much time you need to spend on
the meeting.
zGive time to each person to share their views. Avoid simultaneousdiscussions.
zIf decisions need to be taken, discuss them and articulate the outcome.
zIf actions need to be taken after the meeting, list down the actions along
with who is responsible for the action, who will support it and a time-line
for completion of the action.
zAt the end of the meeting prepare a brief report. The report needs tohave following information:52Documentation of the Meeting
Date:  T ime: V enue:
Purpose of the meetingMembers present during the meeting Absent members1)2)
3)
4)Decisions taken1)2)3)
Action to be taken
  Actions Who will take Who will support it? Date of
action? completion of the
action
Signatures of the members
This report needs to be appropriately filed and should be referred to during
the next meeting, to review the progress.
Some tips to play your role as an effective coordinator of
a village meeting
zAs an ASHA you have to prepare adequately before meeting. Personally
meet the participants beforehand and inform them about the agenda of
the meeting. Have clarity on what you are going to discuss. You should also
be well aware about the complexity of the issue.
zYou should be able to judge what will be the reaction of the otherperson when you discuss the issue with her or him. Be prepared with thecounter-arguments.
zWhile having the discussion listen and observe carefully. Any change in a
person’s expression communicate a lot.53zDuring the discussion, if you need to take some on-the-spot decision, be
prepared for it.
zAt the end of the discussion, briefly articulate the decision taken or theactions enlisted.
zWithin a few days after the discussion. Ensure that the decisions are putinto action.
zIt is very important that each meeting is documented. You may use thegiven format to document your meetings.
zIn the process of coordination, each member plays an important role.As an ASHA you need to make sure that you are in touch with all theconcerned stakeholders and keep them  informed of the progress.
zNever hesitate to take help of others while facilitating a meeting. If youneed help, identify the person well in advance and brief her/him whatkind of help you need. You should to have full confidence in the person you
select.
A person needs to be confident and have good
self-esteem so as to effectively articulate her/his
thoughts.
54References
zBE YOUR TRUE SELF-'To be that self which one truly is' by Soren
Kierkegaard
zwww.ncte-in.org/pub/unesco, info@123oye.com- Articles on selfDevelopment-The real you, Daily planning By V . Jayaram,Take yourself toTop- Chris Widener.
zTraining for Transformation- handbook for Community Workers-
A. Hope.S.Timmel and C. Hodzi.
zwww.wikipedia.com
zText book of social sciences for standard nine, Gujarat State School Board
zIndian Public Health Standards (IPHS)
zwww.assertiveness.com-Understanding Assertiveness by Stuart Sorensen
zwww.spicewoodgroup.com-The Wellness Workbook, Ryan and Travis
zhttp://www.businessballs.com
zwww.bbraham.com
zSkills, Techniques and strategies for Effective Negotiation: Tips from
Barbara Braham.
zNegotiations and Resolving Conflicts: An Overview prepared by Professor E.Wertheim, College of Business Administration,North-eastern University.
zHuman Rights Education for Teachers in Central Asia-Canadian HumanRights Foundation5556Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare
Government of IndiaReading Material
 forASHA
BOOK NO-5
asha
