Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare
Government of IndiaReading
Material for
ASHA
Book No- 4
National Health Programmes, 
AYUSH & Management of 
Minor Ailments
Minor Ailments
(2005-2012)1 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Reading Material 
for ASHA
Book No-4
JULY, 2006 
Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare
 Government of India
National Health Programmes, AYUSH & 
Management of Minor Ailments
(2005-2012)3 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
S. No. Particulars Page Nos.
 Acknowledgements 5
1. Introduction 7
2. Tuberculosis 9
3. Malaria 13
4. Wound Care 16
5. Dog and Other Animal Bites 18
6. Burns: First Aid 21
7. AYUSH 24
Contents
Acknowledgements
Numerous people have contributed to the development of this reading 
material for ASHA. We acknowledge the contribution of the Mentoring 
Group of ASHA and other experts who have given their suggestions, 
valuable time and labour to bring out this reading material for ASHA. 
We are especially grateful to Shri Prasanna Hota, Secretary, Health & 
Family Welfare, Smt. S. Jalaja, Additional Secretary, Shri B.P. Sharma, Joint 
Secretary and Dr. D.C. Jain, Additional Director (Public Health, NICD) for 
their encouragement, constant support and guidance.
We would like to thank United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and 
National Institute of Health & Family Welfare (NIHFW), for rendering support in organizing the reading material. We also acknowledge 
the important contribution of Dr. Dinesh Agarwal, Technical Adviser 
(Reproductive Health), UNFPA, India.
I gratefully acknowledge the hard labour and sincere efforts put in by 
my colleagues Dr. Manoj Kumar, Assistant Commissioner (Training) and 
Dr. Himanshu Bhushan, Assistant Commissioner (Maternal Health).
Dr. Narika Namshum
Deputy Commissioner
Training DivisionMinistry of Health & Family Welfare
Government of India
July 2006Introduction1
You have by now learnt about how to help families in your village to 
access available services for: 
 care in pregnancy, delivery and post-natal period
 caring for the newborn, infant and child
 prevention of unwanted pregnancy
 early and safe abortion
 prevention and management of RTIs/STIs
 information and counselling for adolescents 
In the village there would be many other health problems like TB, malaria, dengue, blindness etc. You may come across patients who may have minor or major ailments and injuries, which need medical attention. Book number 
4 provides you necessary information in helping people access services 
available in the various National Health Programmes. In the past, programmes 
have suffered due to lack of community participation. It is envisaged that 
information available in this book will facilitate in organizing community action to achieve various National Health Programme objectives. 
India has a rich tradition of indigenous system of medicines e.g., Ayurveda 
and local health practices. Many people prefer to access and utilize 
services available from such providers. You will also learn about some of 8 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
the remedies available in Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy systems of 
medicine in this book. This will help you to guide people who desire to 
undergo treatment as per preference for the particular therapy. Tuberculosis2
Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by bacteria. It occurs 
commonly in lungs but can occur in different parts of our body i.e. 
intestines, kidneys, bones etc. There may be about 15 to 25 confirmed cases 
of TB in your village. Please ensure that 
all of them are identified and registered 
for treatment.
Lung TB spreads by air. When a patient of 
TB coughs or sneezes, the bacteria enters the body of other persons who breathe 
that air. However, TB can spread to other 
parts of the body too. In women, TB of reproductive organs can cause infertility. 
You can suspect a person of having tuberculosis if he/she has any of the following signs/symptoms:
 Persistent cough for more than three weeks especially with sputum
 Low grade fever especially during evening
 Weight loss/fatigueSpread by coughing
10 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
 Loss of appetite
 Occasional presence of blood in sputum 
(Haemoptysis)
In our community, old persons with all the above 
symptoms are generally neglected thinking that 
these are common symptoms of old age. But, 
whoever has the above symptoms should be suspected 
of having TB.
Vulnerable situations
 People with malnutrition
 People living in crowded areas like slums etc.
 People living in houses without proper ventilation
 People living in environmentally polluted areas
 People with HIV/AIDS
 Women and children are equally vulnerable 
Generally, all the poor are vulnerable as they have the maximum chances 
to fall into the above categories.
Under the Revised National Tuberculosis Control 
Programme, the following services are available:
 Sputum of person having cough for more than 
three weeks is examined three times in Microscopy 
centres. You should know the nearest microscopy 
centre. You may ask the ANM where they are so that you could guide a person to these places 
for sputum testing. 
 If sputum examination shows evidence of TB, anti- 
TB drugs are initiated. Duration of treatment would be as per doctor’s advice ranging from six months 
to nine months.
 In some cases, X-ray may be necessary and if it is 
positive, anti-TB drugs are given. 
Anti TB drugs are available at all district TB centres, TB clinics, government hospitals, district hospitals, Haemoptysis 
three samples of Sputum 
Sputum Examination
X-Ray
11 TUBERCULOSIS
CHCs, PHCs etc. Again you could check 
with the ANM for treatment of TB. Directly 
Observed Treatment Short Course (DOTS) 
centres have been established. They provide treatment free of cost, which is given under 
the supervision of the local ANM, MPW etc. 
or through voluntary workers. You are also 
supposed to work for this programme as a 
DOTS provider in future. A separate training will be given to you so that you know how 
to provide services under this programme.
TB can affect different organs in the body
12 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Your roles & reponsibilities 
Early detection and treatment
 Advising persons having the symptoms mentioned earlier, irrespective 
of age as well as people from the poorer sections to have their sputum 
examination done. 
 Ensuring that in your village all the persons who are on the treatment 
take complete course of drugs.
 
As DOTS provider
 As ASHA you are going to be one of the DOTS providers.
 You should know about the DOTS centre and other DOTS volunteers in 
your area.
 You need to know which medicine is to be given at what time etc. You 
may need to keep records of the cases that you are handling. You may ask your ANM/MPW or PHC doctor for giving training to you on these 
issues.
 As DOTS provider you need adequate stock of anti-TB drugs for those 
patients looked after by you. Request the TB centre to ensure this.
 As DOTS provider you should known how much incentive is available 
and how and from whom you can get it.
In prevention of TB
 Advise the patient/family about disinfection of sputum for stopping spread 
of disease. One of the useful methods is the deep burial of sputum.
 Advise the people regarding prevention of TB
 While coughing/sneezing, cover mouth and nose with hand/
handkerchief.
 Not to spit indiscriminately.
 Counsel them about their nutritional status, suggesting better and 
affordable options in terms of fulfilling their nutritional needs.
 Immunize the child with BCG immediately at birth.
 Advise all on clean habits/taking nutritious food, maintaining proper 
ventilation at home.Malaria is an illness caused 
by the presence of malarial 
parasite in the human body. 
It spreads through the bite of mosquito. When a mosquito 
bites a person suffering from 
malaria, the parasite enters 
the body of the mosquito. 
When the infected mosquito bites a healthy person then 
he/she may develop malaria. 
A  p e r s o n  w i t h  m a l a r i a 
generally has fever with chills daily/alternate day, generally with headache, bodyache and vomiting. The fever comes down with 
profuse sweating and leaves the person with generalized weakness 
and discomfort. 
Malaria3
14 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Presumptive (inital) treatment for malaria fever
 It should be given to all fever cases if malaria is suspected after taking 
blood film wherever possible.
 It should be given to all persons irrespective of age and sex including 
infants and pregnant women.
 This is done to destroy the malaria parasites in the blood and give 
relief to the person having malaria.
 Certain cases of malaria 
can be life-threatening 
and hence to have radical 
treatment after presumptive ( i n i t i a l )  t r e a t m e n t  i s 
important
 Anti-malarial drugs should 
not be taken on empty stomach.
National Vector Bone Disease Control Programme
The following anti-malaria activities are undertaken by government health 
facilities:
 Blood sample of patient with fever is collected by the Multi-Purpose 
Worker (MPW)/ANM. Thick and thin blood smear are made and 
confirmed for malaria parasite.
 If found to be positive, the radical (final) treatment is given free of cost 
on doctor’s/health worker’s advice. The drugs given are Chloroquine and Primaquine.
 Primaquine should not be given to infants and pregnant womenWhenever a case of fever is seen without any other sign/symptom 
such as rash/diarrhoea/cough etc. always consider it to be malaria. Give 
treatment on that basis. 
Age in 
YearsTablets Chloroquine 
Phosphate(150 mg base) 
(no. of tablet)
< 1 ½
1-4 1
5
-8 2
9
-14 3
>
 15 415
Preventive measures
 Elimination of waste water 
collection sources prevents 
breeding of mosquitoes.
 Pouring burnt motor oils in 
stagnant water pools prevents breeding of mosquitoes. 
 Using mosquito nets/medicated 
bed nets while sleeping.
 Fumigating the house with neem 
leaves and applying neem oil on 
uncovered parts of body.
Your roles & responsibilities 
Early detection
 Ensuring that all fever cases get the blood smear examination done by the 
ANM/MPW. 
 Help the health worker in tracking the fever cases in your village.
 Help the community to access the health worker at the sub centre/
village. 
Treatment and referral 
 To act as a depot holder for Chloroquine.
 As depot holder you should ensure enough stock of Chloroquine, especially 
in the monsoon & following months. 
 Ensure that all smear positive patients get complete treatment by ANM/
MPW. 
 Sometimes malaria cases may be serious and to save the life of the patient 
you need to escort the patient to nearest health facility.
 Serious malaria patients may have any of the following symptoms:
 Patient is abnormally sleepy, difficult to wake or confused.
 Patient is unable to stand or sit.
Preventive measures
Educate the community about the preventive measures as discussed earlier.MALARIA
Wound can be of two types
a. Without bleeding : Abrasions, small cuts etc. 
b. With bleeding.
Any wound requires immediate care.
Following steps should be taken for wound care
 First clean the wound and the surrounding area with clean water. Use 
different cotton swabs for each cleaning.
 Wipe away the dirt with cotton gently, but do not rub it. Rubbing 
disturbs the clot and it can start bleeding again. 
 Make a rectangular pad using cotton 
between two layers of gauze. The 
diagonal of the rectangle should 
be one inch longer than the wound itself. Ask your trainer to teach you 
to make this. 
 If the wound is dry, then it need 
not be opened. 
 For sharp cuts, stitches may be 
needed. Usually simple stitching of small injuries can be done 
at nearby health facility. Such persons need to be sent to health facility.4
Wound Care
17
 It is advised that all persons with wounds be given TT injection at the 
earliest at health facility. 
 For bad wounds, give first level care and refer to health facilities.
Sometimes you may need to control bleeding
 First, stop the bleeding. Press the wound with gauze or a clean cloth 
if the bleeding doesn’t stop.
 Clean the wound with cotton balls 
soaked in clean water. Cotton swabs 
should be just about wet. If you 
have no cotton, soft clean cotton cloth from sari or dhoti will do.
 If there is continuous bleeding from 
the wound then immediately refer 
to the nearest health facility.
Using local and home remedies
We have very good home remedies for wound care.
 Application of ice on bleeding wound until the bleeding stops.
 Haldi in oil is an excellent anti-septic. For abrasions and small cuts, 
application is enough. Dressing is not required in such cases.
 Aloe is a good wound healer and a natural dressing too. Cut a piece 
of aloe across its length and of the wound size. Put the raw cut side of aloe and tie it on the wound with cloth. Replace aloe dressing 
everyday.
 Application of neem oil is a good substitute. For bigger wounds, you 
may put it on the dressing pad.
 Raw papaya pieces can be an effective dressing. This is especially good 
for infected wounds.
 Triphala powder pressed on the wound stops small bleeds and also works as an antiseptic. You can wash the wounds also with Triphala 
kadha.
Your role and responsibilities : 
 To stop bleeding by application of pressure on the wound.
 Refer all patients with continuous bleeding for stitches to nearest health 
facility.WOUND CARE
Dog and animal bites: Will it be rabies?
Dog bite is greatly feared because it can give rise to a deadly illness, 
which is called rabies. This is an illness, which affects the brain. The 
victim fears water. This is due to severe spasm during swallowing. No 
cure is available for rabies. Anti Ra bies Va ccine (ARV) immediately after 
the dog bite can prevent the fatal illness. These vaccines are available in 
government hospitals. 
Not all dogs are rabid. Germs are present in the saliva of infected dogs. 
Some dogs get the infection from wild animals such as wolf or tiger. The 
infected dog passes it on to the other dogs. All infected animals finally 
die and may infect others in the meantime. Controlling stray dogs is the 
key to prevent rabies. Monkeys and other animals can also be infectious if they are rabid due to such bites.
Very effective and simple first aid for 
any dog bite is to:
 Wash the wound with soap and water 
thoroughly. This is most important. 
 Do not disturb the wound. Leave 
it open. Tie a loose dressing and 
advise to consult doctor/other staff 
in hospital. 5
Dog and Other 
Animal Bites
19
How dangerous is the 
bite?
People will ask you if the 
bite is dangerous. A bite 
can cause illness only if the 
animal itself is infected. First symptoms of rabies in bitten 
person may appear early 
within 10 days or more after 
the bite. 
Rabies infection is likely if a 
pet dog dies within 10 days 
of the bite or if it shows any signs of rabies. Even 
a scratch on the skin may give rabies infection. Each wound is 
important. We can decide the risk of exposure as follows:
Mild:  Licks on normal skin, scratches without blood, drinking raw milk of 
s
uspect cattle.
Moderate:  Licks on fresh cuts, scratches with blood oozing, minor wounds 
f
ewer than five, all wounds except those on face, neck, head, palms and 
fingers.
Severe: All bites and scratches with oozing blood on neck, face, palms, 
f
ingers, face and head, Lacerated wounds on any part of body, wounds 
more than five, bites of wild animals.
If the biting animal is not seen or around, the case should be treated as 
severe.
Bite or saliva of a rabies patient is also infective. The effect of ARV reduces 
after a period of six months, so for any further occasions of dog-bite, fresh vaccination is necessary. 
Rabies in dogs: Abnormal behaviour
Identifying and killing rabid dogs is essential. Remember that there are two types of rabid dogs - the aggressive and the silent. The aggressive DOG AND OTHER ANIMAL BITES
20 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
kind keep biting and attacking humans and animals. They may refuse 
feeds but bite at wood or iron objects. They look ferocious. There is 
profuse salivation. 
Usually rabid animals act strangely. Sometimes they are sad, sometimes 
restless or irritable or attacking. Their mouth dribbles and froths and this 
fluid is highly infectious.
An originally aggressive dog may turn docile. The silent type languishes 
to death in neglected places. Wild animals may look friendly and turn to 
habitations. In case there are such problems in your area these need to 
be addressed and Gram Panchayats have to play the key role. 
Immunizing dogs
Immunization of dogs is essential. The protection given by vaccines used in the government veterinary services lasts for six months. Protection 
by newer vaccines lasts for one year. Those who handle dogs also need 
immunization every six months. A common problem is whether to use the milk of an animal bitten by a suspected dog or animal. The rabies germ is 
not reported in the milk of animals. It is completely destroyed by boiling, 
so milk of such animals is not harmful. However, the saliva of the animal 
will contain germs if infected by rabies. The key issue is to avoid direct 
contact of saliva of such animals.
Your role and responsibilities : 
 Wash the site of bite with soap and water thoroughly.
 Refer all cases of dog/other animal bites to facility where an anti-rabies 
vaccine is available.
 Advise people to get pet dogs vaccinated against rabies.Burns are common injuries in India and women are the common 
victims. 
In some cases, the pressure stove is the culprit. In others it can be gas 
leak from the cylinder.
Children or women may suffer scalds due to spilling of boiling liquids 
— like milk, oil, dal, chai etc. 
Please note that some of the burn cases can be suicide attempts or 
attempt to murder. In any case, our priority should be to give first aid 
and take the person to hospital at the earliest. Inform the doctor about any 
information by the woman on the burn injury being intentional. In case, you know, do let her know about NGOs or counsellors she can approach for help. 
As necessary, the doctors will initiate legal measures in these cases. 
Burns: First Aid6
Common causes
 Kitchen accidents – commonly bursting of pressure stoves 
 Fire crackers 
 Explosion in work places 
 House fires22 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
 Chemical burns
 Electric burns
 Suicide attempts 
 Murder attempts
First aid and other help
First try to put out the flames. The 
immediate first aid for all kinds of 
burns is to pour plenty of cold water 
on the affected part, except on acid burns. This helps to reduce damage 
by absorbing heat from the skin. It 
also reduces pain to some extent. 
Water also helps by separating 
burning clothes from the skin. 
Many people wrongly believe that 
water causes blisters on the skin and instead they wrap the victim 
in blankets. This puts the fire off 
after some seconds, but does not 
absorb the heat. Water is far more effective than a blanket because it cools instantly.
If you are using water-soaked folds of clothes, place them on the burnt part and change them every three minutes. Help the victim to drink as 
much water as possible. This helps to overcome the shock caused by fluid 
loss from the body. Cover the burns with a clean cloth to protect from dust, flies, etc. Unless the burns are minor, all burn cases must be referred 
to hospitals. Facial burns and burn in hands should be referred.
You may have to treat small burns at home. Treat it like any other wound. 
Herbal applications like neem oil, coconut oil, aloe or raw papaya dressings are good. 
Prevention of burns
Prevention is better than cure. Think and start from your own home. Synthetic clothes catch fire quite quickly. They stick to the skin more 23
Your role and responsibilities: 
 Pour plenty of cold water on the affected part
 Refer the patient to a hospital for further treatment
 Educate about safety measures specially while working with stoveseasily. Advise people to always take care regarding their clothes and sari 
pallus etc, during cooking.
Over-pumping the stove before pinning and igniting is dangerous. ‘First 
pin and then pump’ is the correct method to light the stove. BURNS: FIRST AID24 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
In this chapter some remedies for AYUSH systems of healing are spelt out. 
The knowledge about these remedies will be useful for ASHAs for their 
day-to-day work in community.
Iron-deficiency disorders
Ayurveda has simple remedies to prevent iron-deficiency anaemia. Use 
of green leafy vegetables like spinach, Punarnnava , Sigru and fruits like 
Amalki , Dadim , dry grapes etc. in daily diet is important to prevent blood 
deficiency. ‘Mandookparni’  fried in ghee is also indicated to increase 
the RBC. Therapeutically, use of ‘Punarnnavadi mandura’  with water or 
buttermilk is indicated for minor and moderate anaemia. Anaemia in girls 
is a common cause for amenorrhoea. Therapeutically use of ‘Rajapravartini 
Vati’ 500mg. two tabs per day upto the onset of menstruation is beneficial 
in the condition. Three gms. powder of equal quantity of black tila (sesame), 
Shunti  and ghritakumari  (aloe) and one gm. jaggery with tepid water twice 
a day or decoction of above drugs including jaggery in the dose of 10-20 ml. twice a day is indicated for scanty menstruation. Anaemia caused 
due to excessive bleeding during menstruation could be managed by the intake of 
‘tanduliyaka’  (rice wash) with iron preparations like ‘mandura 
bhasma’  0.5 gm, or ‘Punarnavadi mandura’  0.5 gm and ‘Shukti Bhasma’  
0.5 gm. twice daily. 
Homoeopathic medicines improve absorption and thereby help in 
iron intake as supplement or from food rich in iron. Commonly used 7
AYUSH
25
homoeopathic medicines for iron deficiency anaemia are given below with 
their indications.
 Arsenic album: Anaemia due to malaria, excessive prostration, oedema, 
violent and irregular palpitation.
 Calcarea carbonicum: Palpitation & tachycardia, vertigo, anorexia, 
nausea, eructation; Pale, weak fatigue, lassitude, easily tired; Headache 
and heaviness at morning, profuse sweating on head.
 China: Chief remedy for anaemia resulting from loss of fluids, as in 
lactation or haemorrhage, or from all exhausting discharges, such as menstrual flow, long-lasting diarrhoea.
 Ferrum metallicum: Paleness of the face and puffiness of the extremities, 
weakness, easily exhausted.
 Ferrum phosphoricum: Anaemia and chlorosis; it removes the underlying 
dyscrasia giving rise to the anaemic or chlorotic conditions and cures the trouble.
 Kali carbonicum: Anaemia after loss of fluid or vitality; Pallor; Aversion 
to be alone; Backache, weakness, profuse menses, irregular with clots, weak before menstruation; Backache; Vertigo.
 Natrum muriaticum: Anaemic and debilitated conditions due to loss 
of fluids, especially in women who suffer from menstrual disorders.
 Phosphorus: Anaemia; Morning diarrhoea; Restlessness; Weakness 
and prostration; Nervousness, debility and trembling; Nausea and vomiting.
 Pulsatilla: Anaemic condition produced by large or continued doses of 
iron; System is relaxed and worn out; Patient suffering from gastric and menstrual derangements.
Some Unani medicines are also commonly used for supplementing iron in pregnant ladies, mothers and children. Sharbat-e-Faulad 15ml. twice daily 
is indicated for pregnant ladies and mothers. In children the medicine 
could be given in the dose of 5 ml. twice daily. Qurs-e-Damvi two tablets 
with butter is also useful for this purpose.
Iron deficiency disorders can be managed as well as prevented by a proper 
intake of iron rich natural foods & the intake of foods, which enhances the absorption and utilization of iron from the intake of foodstuffs.AYUSH26 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Iron rich foods 
Green leafy vegetables, spinach, ragi, jaggery, drumstick, dates raisins, amla 
and figs etc. For enhancing the absorption of iron, one must take whole 
grams, sprouts, fresh fruits and fresh raw vegetables. Intake of tea, coffee 
and other preservatives in the food interfere in the absorption of iron. So by avoiding all the beverages, we can enhance the iron absorption. 
Diseases of gastro-intestinal system
Gastro-intestinal system plays an important role in the normal and abnormal states of health. Ayurveda describe that the use of wholesome 
diet is the only factor that promotes the healthy growth of man. Food 
should be taken at proper time, when the body feels light after the digestion of previous meals, after the clearance of bowels and urine and 
when the mind is free from worries. Clean and hygienic food should be 
taken in optimum quantity. The food should not be too hot or too cold, 
too heavy or too light. 
Diseases of the gastro-intestinal system are primarily caused by the food 
and water that we take. The root causes of many chronic diseases are 
also related to factors derived from partially digested or undigested food materials. Therefore, the disorders arising from gastro-intestinal tract 
should be promptly managed. If digestive capacity is low simple remedies 
like ‘Trikatu’ and ‘Panchakola’ powders 2 gms.twice daily are indicated for use along with warm water before meals. In abdominal pain due to 
indigestion, Hinguvachadi Churna, Lashunadi Vati, Chitrakadi Vati etc. is 
indicated in the dose of two tablets twice daily with warm water.
Constipation is a common symptom of many illnesses, which can be 
managed by powder of ‘Triphala’ (equal quantity of fruits of amla, harada 
and baheda) 5 gms. with tepid water at bedtime. 8-10 dried grapes of 
bigger variety boiled with about 250 ml. of milk is also indicated at bedtime for relieving constipation.
Unani medicines are widely used for the management of abdominal 
distension and gastritis. Qurs-e-Tankar or Qurs-e-Kabid is indicated one 
tablet twice daily in this condition. Qurs-e-Alkali one tablet twice daily 
may be used as an antacid. In non-specific diarrhoea Qurs-e-Zaheer one 
tablet twice daily is useful. In case of amoebiasis Qurs-e-Deedau one 
tablet twice daily is indicated.27
Naturopathy and yoga systems provide various ways to keep the gastro-
intestinal tract in a good condition. Naturopathy teaches us to take the 
foods, which are natural, easy to digest, absorb and eliminate. According 
to naturopathy, nutritious and harmless food should be taken for proper digestion, absorption and elimination. Hydrotherapy, mud therapy and 
massage therapy helps to strengthen the digestive system and to eliminate 
the toxins from the digestive system.HOMOEOPATHIC DRUGS IN DIARRHOEA, NAUSEA 
AND VOMITING
Nausea and vomiting especially when 
the tongue is clean Ip. 30 every 2 hours
Thirst for small quantities but very frequent and when the above remedy does not work Ars. 30 every 2 hours
In case of gastro-enteritis, when vomiting and diarrhoea occur, either of the above remedies may be indicated and also if no indication of one remedy is clear Ip 30 every 1 to 3 hours depending upon severity of disease
Vomiting after over eating, especially spicy food. Diarrhoea after rich spicy food. Nux 30 every 2 hours
Diarrhoea after rich, greasy food, pastry, cocoa etc. Puls. 30 every 6 hours.
Diarrhoea with involuntary passage of stools while passing flatus Aloe 30 every 2 hours
Diarrhoea, effensive stools or even otherwise with insecurity or rectum (it may also be given when no definite indication of the above drugs are available)Cyn-d. 30 every 2 hours 
(give mother tincture 5 drops a dose, 
if 30 does not help)
Abdominal colic due to wind and patient presses the abdomen or bends forward for relief. Coloc. 30 every half an hour
If patient is relieved by hot water bag and pressureMag-p 30 in warm water every half an hour. AYUSH28 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Yoga plays an important role in the management of digestive disorders. 
Asana helps to strengthen the weak abdominal muscles and improves the 
function of the digestive system. Kriyas, the cleansing process, eliminates 
the toxins and waste materials from the GIT.
Rational drugs
Ayurveda explains the therapeutics as basically two kinds – one kind is promotive of vigour in the healthy; the other, destructive of the disease 
in the ailing. A drug while inducing therapeutic effect, should not evoke 
untoward effects. In this regard, herbal drugs like Ashwagandha, Shatavari, Guduchi, Vasaka, Hareetaki, Amalki, Vibheetaki, Ginger etc. could be 
considered as safe drugs.
Some common AYUSH medicines
We have seen that the knowledge about the use of medicinal plants 
obtained from our surroundings is valuable. Let us study about some more 
remedies commonly used in the country.
Hingu (Ferula foetida Regel.) 
Hingu consists of gum resin obtained from rhizomes and roots of a 
perennial herb occurring in Persia and Afghanistan. Hing is commonly 
found in our kitchens and is used as a condiment. However, it would be 
interesting to know that it is also used as a digestive and is useful in common disorders like abdominal pain, flatulence and worm infestation. 
In infants, hing mixed with breast milk is given orally for relieving pain 
abdomen. Hing mixed with a little mustard oil can be applied gently over 
the abdomen and a little piece of hing can be put over umbilicus for 
relieving pain in abdomen. Hingwashtaka Churna, which contains hing as main ingredient, half teaspoon mixed with luke warm water could be given 
two-three times a day in abdominal pain and worm infestation.
Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans Houtt.) 
Jatiphala consists of kernels of fruits from Myristica fragrans, an aromatic 
tree commonly found in southern India. The fruit kernels are commonly 
used in dysentery, diarrhoea and vomiting. For vomiting, powder of Jatiphal 
mixed with tulsi juice and 1 gm. honey could be given two-three times a day. In diarrhoea and dysentery, powder of equal quantity of parched 
saunf (Shatapushpa), Jatiphala and sugar in the dose of 2 gm. three or 
four times with cold water or scum of rice should be given.29
Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus) 
Kulattha or horse gram is a commonly found dal in our households and 
has therapeutic benefits in many common ailments. In Urinary calculi, 
1-2 gms of the powder of these seeds is indicated with warm water. 
14-28 ml. of decoction of seeds thrice daily is also indicated in dysuria and dsymenorrhoea. 50-100 ml. dal soup thrice daily is beneficial in 
haemorrhoids and Rheumatoid arthritis.
Kushmanda (Benincasa hispida) 
Popularly known as Petha, Kushuanda is familiar with households and 
has medicinal properties. 7-14 ml. fresh juice of fruit with 3 gms. of 
Yashtimadhu powder twice daily is useful in fits or epilepsy. It is also 
indicated in peptic ulcer, acidity and burning sensation.10-20 ml. juice of fruit-pulp with 10 gm. of sugar-candy two to three times a day is useful 
in these conditions. In dysuria, 60 ml. of fruit-pulp with 5 gm. Yavakshara 
and 25 gm. sugar twice daily is beneficial. 
Lavanga (Syzygium aromaticum) 
Lavanga is the dried flower bud of Syzygium aromaticum Linn. cultivated in many parts of the country. For cough, it could be chewed frequently. 
125 mg. powder of fried Lavanga with honey twice daily could be given to 
small children in cough. In vomiting of pregnant ladies, 1-4 gm. of Lavanga powder with 14-28 ml. of sharbat of sugar twice daily could be given. In 
diarrhoea, the water soaked with Lavanga is given for repeated drinking. 
Maricha (Piper nigrum Linn.) 
Pepper is a common spice found in our houses having medicinal values. 1 
gm. powder of seeds with ghee and honey twice daily is useful in cough. 
In hoarseness, 1 to 2 gms. powder of seeds fried with ghee twice daily is 
useful. In hiccough, 1-2 gms. powder of seeds with sugar twice daily is beneficial. It is one among the ‘three pungents’ (Trikatu) popularly used 
in many gastro-intestinal and respiratory disorders. It is also useful in 
reduced appetite and distaste.
Musali (Asparagus abscendense Roxb.) 
Musali is a cultivated rhizome extensively used by the local physicians. 3-6 gm. powder of equal parts of Musali and Salmali root with 5-10 gms. 
sugar and 5 gms. ghee thrice daily is used in weakness and debility. In 
urinary disorders, 14-28 ml. decoction of Musali with 5 ml. of milk thrice AYUSH30 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
daily is recommended. In Oligospermia, 3-6 gms. powder of Musali with 
equal quantity of sugar-candy and 100 ml. milk is indicated twice daily. 
Nimbu (Citrus limon Linn.) 
Nimbu is a common citrus fruit used in our houses having various therapeutic activities. In distaste and indigestion, it is indicated as 7-14 
ml. juice of fruits three times a day after meals. In jaundice, 12-24 ml. 
juice of fruit should be taken twice a day. In vomiting, syrup of sugar in water with lemon juice is useful. In pain on heels, the use of nimbu cut 
in two halves, warmed in sauce pan and applied as fomentation at ankle 
joints and heels is indicated. In abdominal pain, 7-14 ml. fruit juice with 
1 gm. Yavakshara thrice daily could be given.
Nirgundi (Vitex negundo Linn.) 
Nirgundi is a small shrub seen all over the country and is used in various 
ailments. In simple fevers, 14-28 ml.decoction of leaves with honey thrice 
daily is useful. In rheumatic disorders and Sciatica 14-28 ml. decoction 
of leaves thrice daily is recommended.
Pippali (Piper longum Linn.) 
This is a perennial climber with slender branches. It grows wild in the rainy parts of the country. This is one of the ingredients of ‘Three Pungents’ 
(Trikatu). It is commonly used in low digestive capacity in a combination 
of 1gm. of fruit powder with 2 gms. salt and lemon juice after meals twice daily. In productive cough, 2 gm. of powder of fruit with honey twice daily 
is useful. In dry cough, 60 mg. powder of fruit and 120 mg. Saindhava 
(rock-salt) with warm water twice daily is beneficial. In mucous diarrhoea, 
mix 5 gm. powder of fruit in 1 litre buttermilk and divide equally into 4 
parts. Take 1 part 6 hourly.
Some compound formulations
Lashunadi Vati
In indigestion, diarrhoea and cholera, Lashunadi Vati 250 mg. is recommended. Two Tablets thrice daily with warm water could be given. 
Garlic is the main ingredient of the formulation. Plenty of boiled water 
and ORS liquid also could be given in this condition. 31
Khadiradi Vati
In soreness, irritation of throat and mouth, cough, stomatitis, and dental 
disorders, Khadiradi Vati is indicated. One 250 mg. tablet may be kept in 
the mouth four to six times a day as per the severity of the symptoms. 
It could be given along with honey also. The ‘Khadira’ (Acacia catechu) in this medicine acts as an astringent agent. 
Haridra Khanda
Haridra Khanda is indicated in urticaria, itching skin rashes, skin disorders, and allergic rhinitis. Four tables of 500 mg. thrice daily with water or 
milk could be advised in these conditions. The main ingredient turmeric 
has anti-allergic properties. 
Pushyanuga Churna
In Menorrhagea, Leucorrhoea, Haemorrhoids and Vaginal disorders, Pushyanuga churna is commonly indicated. 3 gms. of powder is taken 
along with honey and rice washs (tandulodaka). mung, wheat, fruits, whey, 
etc. could be given sufficiently.AYUSH