Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare
Government of IndiaReading
Material for
ASHA
Book No- 3
Family Planning, RTI/STIs & 
HIV/AIDS and ARSH
(2005-2012)1 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Reading Material 
for ASHA
Book No-3
JULY, 2006 
Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare
 Government of India
Family Planning, RTI/STIs & 
HIV/AIDS and ARSH
(2005-2012)3 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
S. No. Particulars Page Nos.
 Acknowledgements 5
1. Introduction 7
2. Preventing Unwanted Pregnancies 9
3. RTIs/STIs 21
4. HIV/AIDS 25
5. Adolescence: The Period of Growing Up 28
6. Helping Adolescent Girls to Take Care of 
Themselves During Menstruation31
Contents
Acknowledgements 
Numerous people have contributed to the development of this reading 
material for ASHA. We acknowledge the contribution of the Mentoring 
Group of ASHA and other experts who have given their suggestions, 
valuable time and labour to bring out this reading material for ASHA. 
We are especially grateful to Shri Prasanna Hota, Secretary, Health & 
Family Welfare, Smt. S. Jalaja, Additional Secretary, Shri B.P. Sharma, Joint 
Secretary and Dr. D.C. Jain, Additional Director (Public Health, NICD) for 
their encouragement, constant support and guidance.
We would like to thank United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and 
National Institute of Health & Family Welfare (NIHFW), for rendering support in organizing the reading material. We also acknowledge the important 
contribution of Dr. Dinesh Agarwal, Technical Adviser (Reproductive Health), 
UNFPA, India.
I gratefully acknowledge the hard labour and sincere efforts put in by 
my colleagues Dr. Manoj Kumar, Assistant Commissioner (Training) and 
Dr. Himanshu Bhushan, Assistant Commissioner (Maternal Health). 
Dr. Narika Namshum
Deputy Commissioner
Training Division
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Government of India 
July 2006 
Introduction
Book no. 1 helped you to familiarize yourself with your partners in your 
work in the village. In Book no. 2 you have learnt in general about your 
roles, simple measures to promote health and prevent diseases among 
women and children in your village. Yo u have learnt in somewhat greater 
detail about maternal and child health care including newborn care and 
nutrition. In this book you will learn in detail about how to prevent 
unwanted pregnancy, the various methods that are available, the merits of each method, the side effects that need to be watched for and advice 
that needs to be given. You would also be learning about what advice to 
give to women and men who have complaints suggestive of reproductive 
tract infections or sexually transmitted infections. This book will also 
build on your information on the causes, transmission and prevention of HIV/AIDS. 
You know very well that there are many adolescents and young boys and 
girls in your village. In general, they may appear to be healthy, but they 
need advice and counselling for developing healthy habits. They may also 
need health care for some of the common problems. Also in some parts of our country, marriage takes place at an early age, so that pregnancy 
and child-bearing happens early in their life. Hence adolescent girls need 
to get proper care in pregnancy and childbirth. Adolescents need to be 1
8 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
told about the ill effects of early marriage and pregnancy. Over a period 
of time you will succeed in making sure that no girl below the age of 
18 gets married. Adolescents also need knoweldge and skills to promote 
their health and prevent diseases.
This book will help you in counselling the couples and individuals about 
family planning and how and when to get the services.Preventing 
Unwanted Pregnancies 
What is family planning?
Many couples want to either limit the number of children in the family or 
wish to wait for some time before having children. Similarly newly married 
couples may like to delay having children for two to three years. 
There are several ways by which couples can plan their family’s size 
Benefits of family planning
Using any family planning method for preventing pregnancies can lead to 
following benefits for the health of mother and children in the family.
Mother
 Women with four or more children have greater risk of death during 
childbirth.
 Similarly older women have more problems during childbirth.
 If adolescent girls get married early i.e. before 18 years they start having 
children too soon. These girls are more likely to have complications or 
can die during childbirth. Also children born to these mothers have 
low birth weight and more likely to die in the first year.2
10 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Children
 If a woman has children too close i.e. less than 36 months interval, 
her own health and her children’s health suffer.
 Family with fewer children will be able to take better care of them, 
including their educational attainments, growth and development. 
Other benefits
 Some contraceptives i.e. condoms (both male and female condom) help 
in protecting against infections of genital tract including HIV/AIDS as 
well as preventing unwanted pregnancies.
 Some methods are good to regulate irregular bleeding from uterus.
 Use of family planning methods will allow women to exercise their 
right over their own bodies. If they do not wish to have more children then they can use contraceptives with discretion. 
Different family planning methods
Pregnancies are caused by the union of egg produced by the woman and 
the sperm by the man. The egg (which later grows into a baby after union 
with the sperm) is produced inside the womb of the woman. When a sexual 
union between man and woman takes place, sperms released to the vagina of woman swim toward the egg in the womb. Union of egg and one of the 
sperms results in pregnancy. The walls of the womb provide nourishment 
to the egg. The egg unites with the sperm and grows into a baby. 
There are five main types of family planning methods: 
Barrier methods
If the sperm does not reach the egg, pregnancy can be avoided. For 
e
xample, when a man uses a condom, the sperm remains inside the 
condom only. Therefore, the sperms are not able to reach the egg inside the womb. Thus pregnancy is prevented. 
ManSperm
EggWomanSperm enters the egg 
and unites with itFetus, which grows into 
a babyHormonal methods
This prevents the woman’s 
o
vary from releasing an egg, 
make it harder for the sperm to reach the egg, and keep the lining of the womb from 
supporting a pregnancy. For 
example Mala N tablets.11 PREVENTING UNWANTED PREGNANCIES 
IUDs
These are devices inserted inside the womb. They prevent the egg and 
s
perms from fusing and also prevent implantation.
Natural methods
These help a woman to know when she is fertile, so that she can avoid 
h
aving sex at that time.
Permanent methods
These are operations, which prevent a man or a woman to have any more children in future.
Barrier methods
You will be provided with condoms for distribution to women who need them. Women are shy to buy them from the market. Many do not know 
how to use them and where to keep them.
Condoms (Nirodh)
 Prevent unwanted pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections 
including HIV/AIDS
 A new condom is to be used each time during sex
 Correct and consistent use of condoms is essential to prevent unwanted 
pregnancies
How to use condom?
You will be shown how condoms could be used 
1. Open package carefully2. Unroll condom 
onto erect penis 
before genital contact 
4. Remove penis from 
vagina while still erect and hold onto condom5. Dispose off 
properly3. Be sure to 
unroll condom all the way to base of penis12 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
What you have to do: 
 Advise families to use condom as a family planning method. Also explain 
that condoms prevent sexually transmitted infections.
 Make condoms available to all those who wish to use them.
 If the situation is suitable, you can show the couple how condom is used. 
Use a flip chart and a condom piece. Sometimes you will have to show it 
to the woman and ask her to share it with her husband. 
 Some myths and doubts about condoms need to be answered. The 
misconceptions are: 
 Condoms reduce pleasure of sex. 
 A condom user is an “easy” person.
 If not properly used, condoms can burst during use. In that case, advise 
to use emergency contraceptive pills. 
 The female condom is now available in cities, so that even women can use 
a condom. That is helpful when men are unwilling to put on condoms and it empowers women in risky sex situations. Dispose off the condom properly.
 Keep condoms in cool, dry place and away from sunlight.
 Keep a stock of condoms and show how to use them, and make 
condoms available.
Hormonal methods 
Oral contraceptive pills
Oral contraceptives come in cycle packs of 
28 pills. Only the first 21 of them contain 
hormones. The other seven pills contain iron 
supplements. One pill has to be taken each day. The iron supplement pills are taken 
after completing 21 hormone pills. Since 
most women are anaemic, the iron tablets 
are also helpful. These pills do not interrupt 
the sexual activity. Above all, unlike condom, OCP is a woman-controlled contraceptive 
method. There are several brands available 13
in the market. Our ANM and PHCs have supply of 
MALA-N. You could keep a supply of these pills. 
How to use OC 
Start the pill from any of first seven days of start of menstrual bleeding and continue until the pack 
finishes. Start a new pack again. Taken regularly, 
the pill is almost 100 percent effective in preventing pregnancy. These pills do not cause abortion.
If a woman forgets a day’s dose she should take 
both the missed and regular tablets together. But one must not miss it 
for more than two days. If missed for two days, advise her to take pills as soon as she remembers. She can continue taking the pill each day 
until the pack is finished and also use a condom for sex until seven 
hormonal pills are taken in a row.
You should always mention about the common side effects of oral 
contraceptives such as nausea, mild headache, tenderness of breasts, spotting between periods and sometimes-irregular periods. Explain that 
these side effects are not signs of any serious disease. These usually 
become less or stop in three months. 
You should help women in getting examined by ANM/Medical Officer, 
before starting oral pills. You should give monthly supplies to women who 
have started oral pills after consultation with ANM/Medical Officer.
Emergency Contraceptive Pills (ECP)
Emergency contraceptive pills are pills to be taken within 72 hours of 
unprotected sex. These pills are taken only in some emergency situations. 
These pills are especially useful for those women who have been subjected 
to unprotected sex, slippage or bursting of condoms during sex or sexual violence.
These pills are to be taken as soon as possible after 
unprotected sexual exposure preferably within 72 hours. 
These pills will also not work if the woman is already pregnant. She should take two tablets within an interval 
of 12 hours. 
PREVENTING UNWANTED PREGNANCIES 
Take the first tablet as soon as possible 
within 72 hours of unprotected sex.
Take the second tablet 12 hours after you take the first tablet.14 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Next monthly bleeding will take place within 14 days of scheduled day 
of monthly bleeding. These pills are now available at health centres and 
also at pharmacy shops. No prescription is needed to buy them. They are 
available as EC pills in the programme. Several commercial and social marketing brands are also available. 
ECPs, taken as per instructions, provide protection against unwanted 
pregnancy. Discourage repeated use of ECP and advise for choosing a 
contraceptive method. ECPs do not protect against infections like STI and HIV/AIDS. 
Copper-T 
This is a small T-shaped intra-uterine device (IUD). It is made of pliable plastic with fine copper wire wound around its stem. Two plastic threads 
hang by its stem. After insertion into the womb, Copper-T stays in place 
and is effective for a maximum of ten years. Some Copper-T devices available in the market are effective for shorter duration also.
How does the Copper-T work? 
Copper-T works mainly by preventing sperms and egg from meeting. IUD makes it hard for sperm to move through 
the woman’s reproductive tract and reduces ability of 
the sperm to fertilize the egg. Possibly it also prevents implantation. What you should do:
 You are a depot holder for OCPs (Mala N) 
 You should explain all methods to the women and help them in making 
choices
 Start Mala N tablets after consulting with ANM/doctor that the woman is 
eligible for OCPs
 Tell her about side effects and when/where to approach a service 
provider
 Also provide information about ECPs and where these pills are available 
15
Copper-T can be used 
  Within seven days of last menstrual period
  After six weeks of child birth – This is the best time
 Only trained nurses and doctors should insert Copper-T 
 Copper-T should be inserted only at health centres or hospitals
 Women can get Copper-T removed any time on demand 
Copper-T is generally safe to use. However it is very critical that proper 
hygiene is maintained. Advise women to have check-up once after one month, then after three months and then once a year. 
Copper-T cannot be inserted at home because stringent cleanliness is 
n 
eeded during  Copper-T insertion. The woman can go home immediately 
a
fter putting Copper-T.
Women should learn how to check the presence of Copper-T. Sometimes 
its gets expelled out of the womb. It is easy to learn technique of feeling 
the nylon threads in vagina. Copper-T cannot escape the womb and go 
up. It can be easily removed by a nurse with a gentle pull. Some women 
have pain and bleeding after inserting Copper-T. It stops after few cycles. 
If the condition does not improve then Copper-T can be removed. There are no after-effects if Copper-T is inserted after six weeks of delivery.
Removal
Copper-T should be removed after 10 years or earlier if woman wishes to have a child, or when she develops heavy bleeding, lower abdominal pain, 
or severe backache. You should help women in getting Copper-T removed 
at an appropriate facility. PREVENTING UNWANTED PREGNANCIES 16 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Natural methods 
There are also natural ways of preventing pregnancies. However, the 
woman has to learn many things that happen to her body during the 
menstrual cycle to adopt this method. Awareness of fertility means that a 
woman learns how to tell when the fertile period of her menstrual cycle starts and ends. Generally menstrual cycle of a woman lasts for 28 days. A 
woman is likely to be pregnant is she has sex during the fertile days (days 
8-19 of the cycle). The natural method of fertility control includes:
1. Avoid having sex
2. Withdrawal3. Safe period method
4. Cervical mucus methodYour responsibilities:
 Counsel women about FP methods including Copper-T
 Explain to them about the duration of protection and who can do insertion
 Accompany the woman to the nearest health centre for insertion 
 Advise women on proper hygiene and cleanliness
 Educate women on natural family planning methods 
 Talk about benefits of family planning to couples and individuals, boys 
and girls at different occasions. These issues can also be discussed in the meetings of self-help groups, adolescent groups. Include information about 
prevention of RTIs/HIV/AIDS also. Dispel any rumours or mis-conceptions about contraceptives in villages
 Find out the facilities where FP services are available such as NSV and 
female sterilization
 Accompany desirous men and women to a facility where sterilization 
services are provided. In some states there are monetary incentives for 
those motivating or accompanying sterilization or Copper-T acceptor
 Help nurse didi to contact women wanting to have a Copper-T insertion
 Promote male participation in family planning17
Safe period
Women with menstrual cycle between 26 and 
32 days can prevent pregnancy by avoiding 
unprotected sexual intercourse on days 8 to 19, 
taking the day of starting of menstrual cycle as day one. You should know more about standard 
days method from your ANM.
Cervical mucus method
The opening of the womb of the woman has a 
sticky fluid called cervical mucus. Typically the mucus is thin and sticky 
for two days before and after ovulation, which allows 
for easy passage of the sperm. This is the fertile period. In other days the mucus is thick, dry and breaks on 
stretching. These days are infertile.
These natural methods need a lot of self-control and 
have a very high failure rate. Therefore it is advisable to adopt other contraceptive methods that have 
low failure rate in case the woman does not desire 
pregnancy.
However, fertility awareness of a woman is desirable in case of couples 
with the problem of infertility to increase their chances of conception in many cases.
Your responsibilities:
 Talk about fertility awareness in the meetings of women’s groups. 
 With ovulation awareness a woman can choose to conceive or avoid 
conception in that cycle. However, it is essential to caution the couple on 
the high failure rate of this method.
 If a woman has not conceived so far, fertility awareness can help in timing 
the sexual intercourse and increase their chance of conception.
 For contraception, the couple needs avoiding sexual intercourse in fertile 
period.PREVENTING UNWANTED PREGNANCIES 18 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Lactational Amenorrhea Method
Breastfeeding under certain conditions can prevent 
the ovaries from releasing eggs. This method does 
not cost anything, but it is most effective for 
only the first six months after childbirth.
How to use breastfeeding for preventing 
pregnancy?
 If baby is less than six months old.
  If the woman has not had monthly bleeding after giving birth.
 If the woman is exclusively breast feeding 
the baby, (not even water) and feeding the baby whenever she/he is 
hungry, with not more than six hours between feedings, day and night. 
The baby does not sleep throughout the night without feeding.
Use another method of family planning as soon as any of the following things happen:
 Baby is more than six months old, or
 Monthly bleeding starts, or
 Baby starts taking other kinds of milk or other foods, or starts sleeping 
for more than six hours during the night
Your responsibilities:
 Communicate messages on the Lactational Amenorrhea Method during 
meetings 
 Explain to women about three conditions necessary for practicing Lactational 
Amenorrhea Method
 Assist the women for contraceptive method if she is not conforming to 
three conditions. 19
Permanent methods 
Vasectomy (male sterilization) 
This is a very small operation for permanently preventing childbirth. 
Vasectomy requires less time and not much trouble for men. No hospital 
stay is necessary. 
There are two methods for vasectomy
 Conventional vasectomy
 No scalpel vasectomy
Conventional vasectomy
The procedure takes a few minutes and the person can go home in an 
hour. An experienced doctor uses a scalpel to make a small slit in the 
scrotum, and finds the vas on each side. The vas is tied and cut to stop 
the sperms from reaching the semen sac. One stitch is required.
No scalpel vasectomy
The no-scalpel  method uses only a needle puncture to complete the 
p
rocess. No stitch is required. So no need to come back for stitch removal. 
This method is becoming popular. Now doctors are being trained in this new technique. There are less side effects of NSV as compared to conventional vasectomy. This is a safe and easy method and requires only 
10-15 minutes.
Men commonly think that vasectomy causes weakness — in work and 
sexual life. This is not true and there is no evidence about it so far. The testicles are not even touched in vasectomy. It is the testicles that secrete 
hormones and regulate sexual functions. Vasectomy does not affect this 
any way. There is a need to popularize vasectomy.
Why sometimes pregnancy occurs after vasectomy?
After vasectomy three months are needed to make the semen sperm-free. A condom has to be used during this period This point is often ignored by 
men and conception can take place. Condom use for three months after 
vasectomy can prevent chances of pregnancy. PREVENTING UNWANTED PREGNANCIES 20 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Tubectomy (female sterilization) 
Tying and cutting the tubes that carry eggs (egg-tubes) is tubectomy. There 
are several ways of doing this procedure. In many states this operation 
is done using laparoscope (doorbeen). It blocks the meeting of ovum and 
sperms. This is a popular sterilization method in India. 
Two methods of tubectomy
Mini-laparotomy is the conventional method
This involves opening the abdomen through a small incision and operating by hand. Local anaesthesia is given by injection. 
The mini-lap method needs hospitalization for two days. It is useful for 
post-childbirth tubectomy, when the womb is still high in the abdomen 
and easy to reach.
Laparoscopy
This involves inserting a laparoscope into the abdomen and applying tight 
plastic rings on the tubes. Laparoscopy can only be performed when the 
womb returns to its normal size and position (at least six weeks after 
childbirth). 
Although tubectomy performed by an experienced surgeon is usually 
successful, laproscopic sterilization may sometimes fail.
Complications are rare in case of tubectomy; sometimes there may be 
internal bleeding, infections, and possible tubal (ectopic) pregnancy later 
if a tube happens to reopen. 
In cases of major complications attributable to sterilization, failure and 
unlikely event of death, you should help in accessing compensation 
available as per FP insurance scheme. You will get more information from your ANM.
Reversing sterilization (recanalization) 
For all practical purposes, sterilization operations are permanent procedures. But, in unusual circumstances like death of all children, recanalization to 
join the cut ends of tubes together can be adopted by the couple. But in 
both men and women, only one in four such procedures succeed. These facilities are available in big hospitals only. Reproductive Tract 
Infections (RTIs) including Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)3
What are RTIs/STIs and how are they spread?
Many women suffer sexual infection, including abnormal discharges 
through the vagina, ulcers and sores in the genital region and pelvic 
infections. Men also generally have sexual infections.
Reproductive Tract Infections (RTIs) are infections of the reproductive 
organs that are caused by various germs. Though RTIs can occur both in 
men and women, they are more common in women, because their body 
structure and functions make it easier for germs to enter.
RTIs that spread through sexual contact are called Sexually Transmitted 
Infections (STIs). Reproductive organs can also get infected because of 
trauma during delivery, unhygienic practices during delivery and abortions, as well as overgrowth of germs normally found in the vagina. Poor general 
health, poor genital hygiene and early start of sexual activity are all 
factors that can make women prone to these infections. 
Many women suffer from reproductive health problems. Women are more 
vulnerable to these infections due to biological factors. Unequal power 
relations in matters of sex i.e. sexual violence, non-use of condoms by 
men also expose women to risk.
22 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Why are these diseases not addressed?
Women are usually too shy and unwilling to talk about problems such as 
abnormal vaginal discharge and genital ulcers. They have been taught to 
silently suffer problems related to sex. There is also a fear that if a woman 
is found to have RTIs, especially STDs, she will be labelled a ‘loose woman’. There is a reluctance to seek medical treatment because of inadequate sex 
education and less access to medical care. The ‘decision-makers’ at home, 
like the mother-in-law, would allow a woman to be taken to a health 
worker if she suffers from pregnancy-related problems or infertility, but 
not for seemingly ‘trivial’ symptoms like excessive vaginal discharge. Even our health system does not adequately respond to these needs.
RTIs have been badly neglected because they do not kill the person directly. 
They usually remain inside a woman’s body, giving her chronic abdominal 
and back pain or making her infertile. Many women keep on suffering 
and remain silent. 
Symptoms of RTIs 
In woman
 Abnormal vaginal discharge, which has bad smell and more quantity 
than usual
 Ulcers or sores over the external genitals
 Lower abdominal pain because of pelvic infection 
In man 
 Discharge from the penis
 Ulcers
The presence of RTIs/STIs could also be indicated in men and women by the presence of:
 Pain or bleeding during intercourse
 Painful swelling in the groin
 Burning pain on passing urine
 Itching around the genitals
Unless treated early, RTIs/STIs can lead to several complications, ranging from pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) and infertility, to increased risk of HIV infections, ectopic pregnancy, cancer of the cervix and death. There 
can be pregnancy-related complications like premature deliveries, low 23
birth weight babies, stillbirths, abortions or birth defects. Newborns can 
also get eye infection from the mother’s birth canal, eventually leading 
to blindness and pneumonia. 
Abnormal vaginal discharge
Usually discharge can be normal if it is for short time and without other 
symptoms like itching or pain. Most women have 
normal discharge during inter-menstrual period, and 
pregnancy. It is normal to have a small amount of discharge or wetness that comes from the vagina. A 
change in the amount, colour and smell may mean 
an infection. Many infections of reproductive tract 
in women show as foul smelling or bloody-yellow, 
greenish or curdy discharge.
Causes of abnormal vaginal discharge
 Lack of genital hygiene, especially during 
menstruation can facilitate infections.
 Use of unclean instruments during delivery, abortions by unauthorized 
providers.
 Sex without condoms especially when partner is suffering from some 
infections.
It is important to remember that these infections are easily preventable and curable.
Preventing infections
 Advise women and families to have deliveries in hospitals only.
 Deliveries should be conducted by skilled persons only. 
 Abortions at registered hospitals only.
 Maintenance of genital hygiene during menstruation.
 Avoiding unsafe sex by use of condoms - women can’t always insist 
on condom use by partner. They need to learn negotiation skills for 
condom use. Availability of female condoms may also save women in 
such situations.
 Women should be encouraged to seek treatment from qualified providers. 
You can help women get services by going with them to PHC/hospital 
in city. Women generally feel shy and awkward to talk about it. 
 Complete treatment as advised by a qualified doctor is a must. 
The partner should also receive treatment in cases of STIs. Women 
REPRODUCTIVE TRACT INFECTIONS (RTIS) INCLUDING SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS (STIS)24 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
especially find it difficult to convince their husbands to get treatment 
as well and use condoms. You should counsel the family (including 
her husband) and seek the help of ANM/MO wherever required.
Sexually Transmitted Infection (STI) in men 
The urethral discharge 
The complaint of urethral discharge is very common in men. Germs are 
the only cause of any pus from urethra. The most common germ causes 
yellow/white pus bead in the morning before first urine is passed. It is 
not always painful. Untreated, it causes bad kinks in the urethra and chronic infection. Men with such a complaint should consult a qualified 
doctor immediately. 
Prevention
 For prevention, the best policy is to avoid multiple sex partners, or 
risky sex behaviour.
 Early and complete treatment cures the infection and stops the spread 
to the next partner. 
 Sex is best avoided during treatment.
 Educate people on this illness and remove undue fears about them. 
This may save them hundreds and thousands of rupees.
 It is important to examine and treat the spouse or partner, as he/she 
will be infected also.
The spouse/partner may already have had this infection and illness in form 
of vaginal discharge and burning during urination. The infection may get 
inside the womb and cause pain and fever. It may become chronic if not 
treated early and properly. Therefore, always ask for any complaints, which 
the woman partner may have.
Your responsibilities: 
 Raise awareness about the causation, transmission and prevention of RTIs 
and STIs.
 Emphasize the importance of early treatment and partner management.
 Distribute condoms and emphasize on promotion of condom and safer sex 
behaviour.HIV  / AIDS
4
HIV is an infection
A very minute organism causes HIV. A person having HIV germs in the 
blood is considered as HIV positive. One cannot tell if a person is having 
HIV infection, as this cannot be identified without a blood test. HIV can 
be transmitted through following routes: 
 Through unprotected sexual intercourse (vaginal, anal) with a person 
having infection. 
 Through blood transfusion when blood is taken from HIV positive 
individual.
 Through contaminated needles used previously in an HIV positive 
person.
 From HIV positive pregnant woman to child during delivery or 
afterwards.
HIV is not transmitted by
 Touching and kissing a person
 Playing, swimming together
 Using common bathrooms and toilets
 Mosquito bites
 Sharing other utility items26 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Risky sexual behaviour
The main cause of HIV/AIDS spread is risky sexual behaviour. Sex with 
many partners without use of condom is risky sexual behaviour. It is not 
only due to having sex with many but also because many people stay away 
from homes and families for long periods of time, e.g. truck drivers. 
Women are more affected by HIV/AIDS in India as this is directly related to 
her economic and social status and gender inequalities. The existing social 
and gender norms have great impact on sexual activity and risk behaviour 
of men and women, which affect women more than men. Women also find it difficult to motivate their partners to use condoms or approach 
services for treatment of infections. 
In our country more than 85 percent of HIV transmissions take place 
through the sexual route. There are no “high risk groups” but there are 
some people who have high-risk behaviour. HIV/AIDS can strike anybody depending on your behaviour.
The window period
After exposure to risky situations, HIV test will be positive only after 6-12 weeks. This is the window period. So one has to wait for this period 
to get an HIV test done. 
AIDS is the disease
AIDS may occur many years after getting HIV positive, but the person is 
infected during this period. AIDS is a serious disease without permanent 
cure, though we have some medicines to reduce its severity. Suggestive 
symptoms of AIDS:
 Continuous weight loss.
 Persisting diarrhoea.
 Repeated fever or illness lasting more than one month.
 The minor features include chronic cough, itching, rash on body and 
genitals, oral thrush (fungal infection), bubos, and illnesses coming 
too often.
There is stigma associated with AIDS and often women suffering from AIDS have been abandoned by their families. We can help in removing stigma 
about AIDS. We can also help the patients to get in touch with support 
network for HIV positive people.27
You can help in preventing HIV/AIDS
Prevention of HIV/AIDS is the only effective way of escape through this 
deadly disease. Following points are important: 
 Creating awareness in community about risk and causation and advising 
men and women to avoid sex with many persons.
 Consistent and correct use of condoms to prevent infection.
 Counsel for HIV testing.
Women are caregivers for the family. When they are HIV positive, they may not get the required family support and care. Counselling for the family is very important. Emphasize use of condom and partner management, 
early detection and treatment of STIs. In some hospitals there are special 
services for pregnant women. This involves counselling, blood tests and 
provision of drugs to HIV positive mothers. This will reduce the risk of 
infection to the baby. Awareness among adolescent boys and girls about healthy family life including sex education is important.
Blood testing facilities are available at most district hospitals. Here blood 
test for HIV/AIDS is done along with counselling services.
Role & responsibilities of ASHA: 
 Raise awareness about, causation, transmission and prevention of  
H
IV/AIDS
 Promote use of condom as a method of dual protection
 Counsel persons having risky sexual behaviour to undergo HIV/AIDS testing 
at nearby VCTC
 Assist HIV positive/AIDS patients to access ARTHIV  / AIDSAdolescence : The 
Period of Growing Up5
Adolescence is a period of rapid physical and emotional development. This 
period starts around 10 years of age and extending till 19 years. 
 This is the period of rapid growth and development. 
 They experience changes in their bodies and minds during this time. 
 It is important that you give due attention to the health of adolescents, 
as the health and productivity of the nation depends on them.
As part of growing up, adolescents will go through puberty. Puberty is the time in life when the body undergoes changes from that of a child to an 
adult. You already know about the chemicals in the body called hormones 
cause these changes. Because there are so many changes happening during 
puberty, adolescents find it difficult to adjust to these changes and often 
they need support.
Not only does the body change, but the emotions of adolescents change too. How they think and feel about themselves, family and friends may seem 
different. As adolescents go through puberty, they 
like to take important decisions for themselves, take on more responsibilities and become more 
independent.
29
Adolescence : The 
Period of Growing UpChanges in girls Changes in boys
Breasts:  In most girls, puberty starts 
w
ith breast growth. When breasts start 
to develop, one may notice small, tender 
lumps under one or both nipples that will get bigger over the next few years. When 
breasts first begin to develop, it is not 
unusual for one breast to be larger than 
the other. However, as they develop, they 
will be alike in size and shape. 
Hair:  Soft hair will start to grow in the 
p 
ubic area (the area between legs). This 
hair will eventually become thick and 
very curly. Hair grows under the arms and on the legs. 
Body shape:  Hips get wider and waist 
w 
ill get smaller. Body will also begin to 
build up fat in the stomach, buttocks, 
and legs. This is normal and gives body the curves of a woman.
Body size:  Arms, legs, hands, and feet 
m 
ay grow faster than the rest of the 
body. 
Skin:  Skin may get more oily. This is 
b
ecause glands are growing too. Almost 
all teenagers get acne at one time or 
another. 
Menstruation:  During this period 
m
enstrual cycle, or “period” begin. Most 
girls get their periods between 9 and 16 
years of age. Body size:  Arms, legs, hands and feet may 
g
row faster than the rest of the body. 
Body shape:  Adolescents will get taller 
a
nd shoulders will get broader. They will 
gain a lot of weight. During this time, many boys experience swelling under their nipples. This may cause them to 
worry that they are growing breasts. 
During puberty, muscles will also get 
bigger.
Voice:  Voice will get deeper. This may 
s
tart with voice cracking. 
Hair:  Hair will appear under arms, on 
l
egs and face, and above penis. Chest 
hair may appear during puberty or later, 
although not all men have chest hair. 
Skin:  Skin may get more oily and may 
s
weat more. 
Penis:  Penis and testes will get larger. 
B
oys get erections due to an increase in 
sex hormones. Erections occur when the penis gets stiff and hard - sometimes for no reason. This is normal. Body will 
also begin to produce sperm during 
puberty. This means that during an 
erection, adolescents may also experience 
ejaculation. This occurs when semen (made up of sperm and other fluids) is 
released through the penis. This could 
happen during sleep. This is called a nocturnal emission or “wet dream.” ADOLESCENCE : THE PERIOD OF GROWING UP30 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Your responsibilities: 
 Young people may have several questions about their body, sex and sexuality, 
and how to remain healthy. Sexuality refers to expression of sexual feelings. 
There is attraction towards opposite sex. They need information, and 
services. 
 You should inform and help the adolescents in getting services through the 
nearest government hospital, i.e., for health care and also during pregnancy, 
institutional delivery, access to contraceptives and services for RTIs/STIs 
and menstrual problems. 
 Males also need information and advice. 
 You may like to visit schools and talk to the young on these issues. 
 Alternatively, you can plan the visit of nurse didi to come to school and 
talk to the adolescents.
 If there are any adolescent groups in the village, you should meet them 
periodically. You may provide information on health issues and seek their 
cooperation and support in our health work. You may also be required to 
go with them to the sub-centre or PHC for health services. 
 Adolescents need support in the community. You can talk to Panchayat 
members, teachers, parents, local leaders and SHG members to provide 
information on the subject.
 You need to find out if Anganwadi Centres run a programme for adolescent 
girls: called Kishori Shakti Yojana. Adolescent girls receive more food under this scheme.
 Talk with adolescents in the meetings of Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
(NYKS), Yuvati Mandals and other youth groups on promoting health and preventing diseases. Helping Adolescent 
Girls to Take Care of Themselves during Menstruation6
Staying clean
Generally girls living in small towns and cities use sanitary pads for 
protection during menstrual period, if they can afford them. These are 
readymade soft cotton pads worn inside the underwear to catch the blood 
as it leaves the vagina. These pads should not be reused. Some girls prefer to make their own pads out of folded cloth or wads of cotton. These pads 
must always be clean and dry when worn. They should be changed several 
times a day and disposed of by burning outdoors in a large empty tin. If 
cloth is used, they should be washed well with soap and water and dried in 
the sun. Sun light is the cheapest disinfectant available in nature. 
In villages there are certain restrictions imposed 
on adolescents during menstruation. Those 
restrictions (Don’ts), which are harmful should 
be discouraged, such as not taking bath during menstruation or not doing any physical work.
It is advisable to wash outer genitals well with 
water every day to remove any blood that is left. 
32 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Changes in bleeding
Sometimes, the ovary does not release an egg. When this happens, the 
body makes less hormone, which can cause changes in how often and how 
much a woman bleeds. Girls whose monthly bleeding has just begun – or 
women who have recently stopped breastfeeding – may bleed only every few months, or have very little or too much bleeding. Their cycles usually 
become more regular with time. Women using hormonal family planning, 
sometimes have bleeding in the middle of the month.
Older women who have not yet gone through menopause may have heavier 
bleeding or bleed more often than when they were younger. As they get 
closer to menopause, they may stop having monthly bleeding for a few 
months and then have it again.
Pain with monthly bleeding
During monthly bleeding the womb squeezes in order to push out the lining. The squeezing can cause pain in the lower belly or lower back, 
sometimes called cramps. The pain may begin before bleeding starts or 
just after it starts.
Tips for taking care
 Do exercise, walk and run 
 Rub your lower belly. This helps the tight muscles to relax.
 Fill a plastic bottle or some other container with hot water and place 
it on your lower belly or lower back. Or, use a thick cloth you have 
soaked in hot water.
 Drink tea with ginger. Women in your community may know of other 
remedies that work for this kind of pain.
 Take a mild medicine for pain with doctor’s advice.
Pre-menstrual syndrome (PMS)
Some women and girls feel uncomfortable one or two weeks 
before their monthly bleeding begins. They may have one or 
more of a group of signs that are known as pre-menstrual 
syndrome (PMS). Women who have PMS may notice:
 Sore breasts
 A full feeling in the lower belly
 Constipation (when you cannot pass stool)
 Feeling extra tired
33
 Sore muscles, especially in the lower back  or belly
 A change in the wetness of the vagina
 Oiliness or spots (pimples) on the face
 Feelings that are especially strong or hard to control
 Craving for certain foods and increased hunger and thirst.
Many women have at least one of these signs each month and some 
women may have all of them. A woman may have different signs from one month to the next. For many women, the days before the start of 
their bleeding is a time of unrest. But some women say they feel more 
creative and able to get things done. These symptoms disappear within a 
few days after the start of the menstrual period.
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA:
Advise to
 Eat less salt. Salt makes the body to keep extra water inside, which gives 
the full feeling in the womb.
 Try to avoid caffeine (found in coffee, tea and some soft drinks like 
cola)
 Try eating whole grains, dalia, soyabean, peanuts, fresh fish, meat, milk 
or other foods that are high in protein. When body uses these foods, it also gets rid of any extra water, so that belly feels less full and light.HELPING ADOLESCENT GIRLS TO TAKE CARE OF THEMSELVES DURING MENSTRUATION