Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare
Government of IndiaReading
Material for
ASHA
Book No- Book No- 2
Maternal & Child Health
(2005-2012)1 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Reading Material 
for ASHA
Book No-2
JULY, 2006 
Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare
 Government of India
Maternal & Child Health
(2005-2012)3 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
S.No. Particulars Page Nos.
 Acknowledgements 5
1. Introduction 7
2. Menstruation and Fertility 8
3. Care During Pregnancy 11
4. Intra-Natal Care & Post-Natal Care 17
5. Newborn Care 20
6. Unsafe Abortions & Medical Termination of 
Pregnancy (MTP)23
7. Immunization 26
8. Diarrhoea 29
9. Acute Respiratory Infection 32
10. Infant and Young Child Nutrition 34
11. Fever 39
Contents
Acknowledgements
Numerous people have contributed to the development of this reading 
material for ASHA. We acknowledge the contribution of the Mentoring Group of ASHA and other experts who have given their suggestions, valuable time and labour to bring out this reading material for ASHA. 
We are especially grateful to Shri Prasanna Hota, Secretary, Health & 
Family Welfare, Smt. S. Jalaja, Additional Secretary, Shri B.P. Sharma, Joint Secretary and Dr. D.C. Jain, Additional Director (Public Health, NICD) for their encouragement, constant support and guidance.
We would like to thank United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and 
National Institute of Health & Family Welfare (NIHFW), for rendering support in organizing the reading material. We also acknowledge the important contribution of Dr. Dinesh Agarwal, Technical Adviser (Reproductive Health), UNFPA, India.
I gratefully acknowledge the hard labour and sincere efforts put in by 
my colleagues Dr. Manoj Kumar, Assistant Commissioner (Training) and Dr. Himanshu Bhushan, Assistant Commissioner (Maternal Health).
Dr. Narika Namshum
Deputy CommissionerTraining DivisionMinistry of Health & Family WelfareGovernment of India 
July 2006 
Introduction
In Book No. 1, you have read about the tasks to be performed by you for 
improving access and utilization of services for health, nutrition, drinking water and sanitation. You have also read about details of registration of pregnant women, Janani Suraksha Yojana, breast feeding, infant nutrition, immunization and diarrhoea. In this Book you would be learning in greater detail about the menstrual cycle and fertility. You would also be learning about the care to be given to a pregnant woman during pregnancy, delivery and during post-natal period. In case a woman/family does not desire to continue a pregnancy, we should help them access services for early and safe abortion as per provisions of MTP Ac t. You will learn about how to 
h
elp them access safe abortion services in this Book. You will also learn 
more details of newborn care, infant and young child nutrition, diarrhoea and also care and advice to be given in case of diarrhoea, fever and acute respiratory tract infection in infants and children.
You will learn about methods for preventing unwanted pregnancy, care 
for reproductive tract infections, prevention of HIV/AIDS and care to be given in case of malaria, TB or other such health problems as well as minor ailments in Books No. 3 and 4. 1
Menstruation and 
Fertility
 Duration of bleeding :  three-five days 
 Bleeding recurs after  : 25-35 days
 Flow  : without clots
In a regular 28-day menstrual cycle the mid 10 days (10th-20th day) of 
the cycle are fertile period during which pregnancy can occur, the first day being the day when the bleeding starts. 2
Normal Menstrual Cyclelining 
breaking 
downIt is very important for women to know about how their body functions especially in relation to reproductive health because they are uniquely gifted with the capacity to give birth to a baby. You know that by the time a girl reaches the age of 10-13 years, a number of changes occur in her body preparing her to meet the complex child birth process. The normal menstrual cycle has the following characteristics: 
blood & tissue being 
lost through the cervix & vaginacervix 
(neck of 
uterus)uterus
vaginaovary developing 
egg (ovum)
fallopian 
tube
egg has not been fertilized lining of uterus not needed to grow a baby9
A woman can become pregnant from the age of 13-16 (when her periods 
begin), up to 45-55 years, (when they ultimately stops). When they stops it is called menopause. If the pattern of menstruation is different from that given above or there is bleeding again after menopause or the bleeding continues after 55 years of age a woman must consult a doctor. 
A girl or woman should consult a doctor if: 
 bleeding lasts for more than six days
 there is too much bleeding especially clots
 there is bleeding in between the cycle
 there is pain during menstruation
 there is infrequent bleeding
 there is bleeding during sexual activity
How reproduction occurs
All females produce “egg” and males produce “sperms” which unite inside 
the womb of the woman and produce a foetus. This grows into a baby. 
The sex of the baby is determined by sex 
chromosomes, through which we inherit our parents’ traits. A woman’s egg has X chromosome and a man’s sperm has either X or Y chromosome (which we may call girl sperm or boy sperm respectively). At the time of fertilization, the X male chromosome of female egg meets either a girl sperm (XX) resulting in a baby girl or a boy sperm (XY) resulting in baby boy. Neither the man nor the woman can do 
MENSTRUATION AND FERTILITY
ManSperm
EggWomanSperm enters the egg 
and unites with itFoetus, which grows 
into a baby10 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
anything to make sure that either a boy or girl is born – this happens 
completely by chance inside the woman’s body depending on whether a boy-sperm (XY) or girl-sperm (XX) meet with the egg. Hence it is wrong to blame a woman for not giving birth to a baby boy, as is generally done.
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA:
As ASHA, you may come across some couples in your village who have no children, or the woman is unable to get pregnant after one or two abortions. If the woman is 20 years of age or above and has been living with her husband for two years, leading a normal marital life but has not become pregnant, advise the couple to consult a nurse or directly go for a check-up to a doctor. Both partners must go together for infertility treatment as either or both of them may be having some problem, which needs treatment. Please note that couples often live apart because one of them has migrated in search of a job. It may be difficult for such couples to have a baby. 
It is also possible that women are being blamed for having only girls. Some 
women may be deserted by their husbands and families for not producing a son. You should clearly communicate the role of men and women in deciding the sex of a baby. Care during 
Pregnancy3
Pregnancy is a natural event in the life of women of reproductive age 
group. However, during pregnancy and childbirth some problems may arise which can threaten the life of the mother, baby or both. It is possible to identify women with some problems quite early if they have routine ante-natal check-up. This will enable them to access specialist care. Care during pregnancy is important to monitor progress and growth of the baby, detect complications at the earliest and treat them accordingly. During the visit the woman and her family should be advised proper nutrition, rest, exercise. They can make plans about where to deliver. This will help both the woman and baby to have a happy and healthy outcome. Minor ailments of pregnancy (e.g. vomiting, heart burn, constipation, backache etc.) are looked after during ANC.
PregnancySchedule of pregnancy care 
 The first visit is recommended as soon as the woman 
feels that she is pregnant This is called registration of pregnancy, which ensures that all pregnant women receive care throughout pregnancy.
 In villages/districts where female foetuses are being 
eliminated before birth, it is further important that pregnancy is registered early.12 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
 The second visit should be made between the fourth and sixth 
month 
 The third visit should be planned in the eighth month 
 An additional visit in the ninth month would help provide better 
care. 
 If the health worker identifies health problems during these visits, a 
visit to a doctor will become necessary.
What is done during pregnancy check-up and care?
 During the first check-up the complete 
history of this pregnancy and previous 
pregnancies, if any, and whether the woman has had any medical/surgical problem in the past is taken. 
  The ANM will weigh the woman to see 
whether the woman is gaining adequate weight during pregnancy, and also check blood pressure (using a balloon-like instrument), and see whether it is normal or not.
  Breast examination to check whether 
breasts and the nipples are normal  will be carried.
  Abdominal examination will be done to know the growth/position of 
the baby.
  A simple blood test will be done to see if the woman is anaemic (lacks 
blood) and if so, the severity. If the woman has anaemia, prompt treatment will help prevent complications.
 Urine examination
 TT Injection
  During repeated visits, details of any problem appearing since last 
visit will be taken care of. BP, weight, and abdominal examination will be repeated.
  Iron tablets will be given to all pregnant women and also treatment for anaemia depending upon the blood test results.
  By carrying out a complete pregnancy check-up, the ANM would be able to detect problems and decide on referring the woman to a doctor.13
Pregnant women with any of the following conditions need to go 
to meet a doctor
 Repeated neo-natal deaths, stillbirths, premature births or repeated 
abortions.
 Vaginal bleeding during present pregnancy.
 High blood pressure or abnormal urine test. 
 If the woman’s previous delivery was through abdominal operation or 
she has had some other abdominal operation in the past.
 The woman has heart disease, anaemia, high blood pressure, jaundice 
etc.
 Very big size of abdomen. 
 Twins. 
 Baby is upside down or in abnormal position inside the uterus.
As ASHA, you should counsel and help in getting such women to 
hospital.
Home care during pregnancy
 The woman’s family and community have the key responsibility for 
making sure that the woman gets more food, takes rest and does not have to do heavy manual work during pregnancy
 The pregnant woman needs extra energy from food, for the sake of 
her own health, for the growing foetus and for effective breastfeeding later on.
 During pregnancy a nutritious diet which is rich in iron, calcium and 
protein is required. For this, a pregnant woman should eat more green, leafy vegetables like palak and sarson, dals, milk, jaggery, eggs, fish, meat, etc.  Taboos and restrictions on a pregnant woman’s diet, such as not allowing certain vegetables, fruits, milk and ghee, might in fact harm her and the baby. 
 Pregnant women are entitled to get food from the anganwadi 
centre. 
 A pregnant woman should not fast. This deprives her and the growing 
baby inside the uterus of essential food. 
 Pregnant women should not carry out heavy manual labour, like 
working on construction sites, famine relief, brick kilns, etc. Other members of the family and community should help to reduce her work burden.CARE DURING PREGNANCY14 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
 Pregnant, adolescent girls are especially likely to be under-nourished 
and are more likely to suffer problems during delivery. They need extra 
nutritious food and help for safe delivery at a health facility.
 Sometimes there are overweight pregnant women who need to avoid 
eating fat-rich food like oil, ghee, sugar, etc), but they should continue to eat vegetables, fruits, nuts and milk which are rich in iron, calcium, vitamins and minerals. They should also take regular exercise and consult a doctor.
Anaemia in pregnancy
Lack of blood in the body is known as anaemia. It is very common in our country. Anaemia in pregnancy leads to complications in pregnant women and can even result in the death of mother and baby. You should be aware that a pregnant woman with anaemia looks pale, feels tired, complains of breathlessness on carrying out routine work, and might have swelling of the face and body. Anaemia can be prevented and treated completely if the woman follows the advice of ANM/doctor. 
 Anaemia is treated with iron tablets, which have to be taken daily for 
many months during pregnancy or by giving injections. If the anaemia is severe, hospitalization and blood transfusion may be required.
 To prevent anaemia, all pregnant women need to take one iron tablet 
daily, starting after three months of pregnancy. In this way, she must take 100 tablets. 
 While giving iron tablets, the woman should be advised that some side 
effects might occur. However, they can be managed in the following ways:
 Nausea or occasional vomiting – this can be prevented/avoided by 
taking the tablet after meals.
 Constipation – this can be managed if the woman drinks more water 
and eats fruits.
 Black stools or mild diarrhoea.
Note
 Iron tablets should not be taken along with tea as that reduces its 
absorption. 
 Anaemia, pregnant women must have deliveries in hospital.
Malaria in pregnancy
 Malaria during pregnancy might be fatal for the woman and may cause 
abortion, stillbirth, low birth weight babies or premature labour.15 CARE DURING PREGNANCY
ALL PREGNANT WOMEN SHOULD HAVE EARLY REGISTRATION  
(1
2-16 Weeks)  
FO
LLOWED BY MINIMUM THREE ANTE-NATAL CHECK-UPS
AND 
HOSPITAL DELIVERY IN A HEALTH CENTRE OR HOSPITAL AS FAR AS 
POSSIBLE.
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA: 
 You should identify all pregnant women in your village.
 You should help pregnant women in getting registered between 12-16 
weeks of pregnancy and in getting the next three ante-natal check-ups. 
 Ensure all requisite examinations/investigations are done for all pregnant 
women.
 You should know the date and time of availability of ANM in Anganwadi 
Centre (AWC) in your village and inform all pregnant women about the 
same.
 Advise pregnant women regarding importance of balanced diet and ensure 
that undernourished pregnant women receive supplementary food from AWC.
 You should track the drop-out pregnant women especially those who live in 
remote areas, are below poverty line, schedule caste/schedule tribe/migrants etc and help them in accessing health services. 
 Help eligible pregnant women to get benefits under Janani Suraksha 
Yojana
 You should also know 
1. The location of nearest FRU/hospital with obstetrician, anaesthetist, 
paediatrician, nursery, O.T. and blood bank. 
2. The mode of transport to reach facility should there be an emergency3. Approximate cost for Caesarean Section, blood transfusion and hospital 
stay, if it is a private hospital.
 In case, it is a second pregnancy, when a couple already has a daughter, 
ASHA needs to be alert to the possibility that the family may reject another daughter and counsel accordingly.16 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
As ASHA you should advise the pregnant woman and her family about 
the potential danger signs during pregnancy, delivery and after delivery, the post-partum period. If she has any of the following problems, she should be taken immediately to the nearest functional FRU directly:
 Any vaginal bleeding during pregnancy.
 Heavy vaginal bleeding during and following delivery, especially if the 
woman is feeling weak and faint.
 Severe headache/blurring of vision.
 Convulsions or loss of consciousness. 
 Labour pains lasting more than 12 hours.
 Labour pains before eight months or 32-36 weeks of pregnancy.
 Premature rupture of the bag of waters or leakage of water from uterus 
membranes, leaking etc.
 Failure of the placenta to come out within 30 minutes after delivery.
 Baby stops kicking inside the wombIntra-Natal Care 
and Post-Natal Care4
Intra-natal care
Delivery occurs normally after nine months of pregnancy. If delivery is 
before time special care for baby may be needed. As far as possible a pregnant woman should have the delivery in a health centre or hospital even if pregnancy is normal. This is mainly because during delivery, labour complications may suddenly occur which can threaten the life of mother, baby or both. During delivery the time between starting of a problem to death of mother, baby or both is so short that it may not be possible to save the life of mother or baby if the pregnant woman is not already in a well-equipped health centre or hospital. 
 Ensure the availability of transport to the FRU/transport money 
available for the same, and how to access it in case of emergency and escort her.
 Find out the money/other provisions available under Janani Suraksha Yojana 
(JSY) for your area, who has the money and what is the procedure to get it and the reporting needed.18 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA:
 Counsel/advise the pregnant women and their families for institutional 
delivery.
 Identify the location of the hospitals, health centres, institutions near your 
village which provide delivery services round the clock, where delivery 
can take place and the cost for the same, if any and how to reach the hospital.
 Escort/accompany the pregnant woman to the hospital for institutional 
delivery.
 If there is no functioning health centre or hospital within reach, or the 
family prefers a home delivery, you should advise the pregnant woman and her family to have the delivery conducted at home by a skilled birth attendant (SBA) such as ANM, staff nurse or doctor. 
 In case a skilled birth attendant is not available, the delivery can be 
conducted by a trained TBA.
 Five cleans must be practiced during delivery: i.e. Clean hands, Clean 
surface, Clean new blade, Clean cord tie and Clean cord stump (do not apply anything on the stump).
 Place of delivery to be kept warm and free from draught.
 Help the mother in initiation of breast-feeding after delivery.19 INTRA-NATAL CARE AND POST-NATAL CARE
Post-natal care
Post-natal period is the period of six weeks immediately after delivery, 
which is important both for the mother and the newborn. In this period, the changes, which have taken place in the organs/system during pregnancy in the woman come back to normal, except breasts. Mother and the newborn are susceptible to some problems which you should be aware of, so that they can be guided for treatment/referral.
Care during post-natal period
 During post-natal period, a woman requires nutritious and balanced diet, 
which is rich in iron, calcium, vitamins and proteins. She should increase her intake of green leafy vegetables, pulses, jaggery, etc. and eat to her satisfaction. She should also take more milk during this period. 
 Under nourished women are given supplementary food from Anganwadi 
Centre by AWW. Ensure that they do come and receive it.
 It is important to give information about different contraceptive 
methods, which a couple can use during the post-partum period. A woman can have sex after six weeks, as by that time any perineal tear or other procedures carried out during child birth.
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA:
 Advise the woman at least one check-up within two weeks of delivery. 
 Advise the women to visit the ANM for minor complaints e.g. sore breasts, 
cracked nipples, foul smelling discharge, pain in legs etc. 
 Assist ANMs in conducting post-natal clinic and screening women and 
children with danger signals.
 Advise registration of birth.
 Counsel on exclusive breast-feeding for the newborn which: 
 helps in better involution of the uterus.
 can produce lactational amenorrhea and thus act as natural 
contraceptive.
 Counsel them on contraceptive needs (temporary/permanent) as required 
and help the women/family to get the same.
 Ask mother to report if there is:
 Excessive vaginal bleeding
 Loss of consciousness
 Fast or difficult breathing
 Fever
 Severe abdominal pain Newborn Care 
5
Every newborn needs certain essential elements of care immediately at 
birth and the first 28 days of life, irrespective of mode of delivery/weight of baby. It is important because for every 10 babies who die during the first year, five babies die in the first 28 days of their life. 
Skin to skin contact
Provide privacy to the mother. Request the mother to sit or recline comfortably. Undress the baby gently, except for cap, nappy and socks. Place the baby prone on mother’s chest in an upright and extended posture, between her breasts, in skin-to-skin contact; turn baby’s head to one side to keep airways clear. Cover the baby with mother’s blouse, ‘pallu’ or gown; wrap the baby-mother together with an added blanket or shawl. 
 When the skin-to-skin contact is not possible clothe the baby in one-
two layers (in summer), three-four layers (in winter) and cover the head & feet with cap and socks respectively. Let the baby and mother lie together on soft, thick bedding and cover them with additional quilt, blanket or shawl in winter.
 The baby should not be given bath immediately after birth.
 Advise the family that baby should be referred immediately to FRU if 
the baby has any of these signs:21
 poor sucking of breast
 becomes sicker
 develops fever 
 fast breathing
 difficulty in breathing
 blood in stool
 pallor of palms/soles
 blue palms/soles
 abnormal movements (convulsions)
 remains excessively drowsy or cries incessantly
 develops yellow staining of the palm and soles
 feels cold or hot to touch
 bleeding from any site
 abdominal distension
 no meconium passed within 24 hours of birth
 no urine passed in 48 hours
Care to be taken during referral of newborn
 Mother should accompany the baby
 Fastest mode of transport should be used
 Baby should be kept warm, keep with mother whenever possible 
during referral.                                                      
 Breast-feed whenever possible
Weighing the baby
 You could find out if the weight of the newborn 
has been recorded. Baby should be kept with mother 
if found in green or yellow zone of the weighing scale.
 You should advise the women/families regarding cord 
care. No dressing/ medicine to be applied on cord.
 Advise regarding early initiation of breast-feeding 
immediately after delivery.
 Colostrum must be given as it prevents the baby from 
infections.
 Exclusive breast-feeding to newborn should be done for 
six months
 Baby should be correctly positioned during breast-feeding 
and should be fed on demand from both breasts each time. Feed the baby during the day as well as during night
If Baby is in Red Zone
Breast FeedingNEWBORN CARE22 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
  While holding the baby, the mother also supports the 
baby’s bottom and not just the head or shoulders. The baby’s chin touches the breast, mouth is wide open and the baby’s lower lip is turned outside.
 No pre-lacteal feeds to be given to the baby.
No pre-lacteal feeds
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA:
 You should advise pregnant women and their families about institutional 
deliveries. In case institutional delivery is not possible, newborn care at home can be given as follows:
 advise the women to have delivery by skilled birth attendant.
 advise the mother to keep the baby warm and dry. No aggressive 
wiping to be done to clean vernix scaseosa as it can lead to loss of temperature.
 ensure that baby is kept in close contact with mother (skin to skin 
contact) as much as possible during day and night. If mother is not available, skin-to-skin contact may be provided by the father/any other adult of the family. 
 It is important to recognize that all newborn babies (both daughters and 
sons) need care.
 You should help parents to get birth registered with appropriate agency. Unsafe Abortions & 
Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) 
6
You know that sometimes unwanted pregnancies occur. In such cases, the 
family or woman may want to abort the pregnancy. For this termination, pregnant women often go to untrained persons, dais etc. The methods employed by them for termination are not safe and the facilities are unhygienic. Hence, there is a great risk to the life of these women. You can educate such women with unwanted pregnancies about the dangers of these illegal, unsafe abortions. Such women should be able to confirm whether they are pregnant and if so, they can seek safe and legal abortion at a government health centre or government approved private hospital. 
Abortions have been legalized since 1971 under certain conditions, as 
given in under the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act (“MTP” Act). Such abortions can be carried out up to the fifth month (20 weeks) of pregnancy. 
Government primary health centres can carry out abortion till eight weeks 
(2 months), while for an abortion after this period, a woman would have to go a hospital. Abortions done early in pregnancy are also safer than those carried out later. Hence, the woman should not wait till her pregnancy has advanced.24 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
 
As per PNDT Act, 1. Detection of sex of foetus during pregnancy is illegal. 2. Termination of pregnancy after identifying the sex of the foetus as 
female is also illegal. 
There are two methods of terminating the pregnancy:
Surgical abortion
This is carried out by evacuating the embryo either using a hand held syringe or electric suction machine 
Medical abortion
This is carried out by using pills
In both cases, it has to be done by a qualified doctor in any approved 
centre. Women undergoing MTP can get more details from PHC. There are advantages/disadvantages of both methods. In both cases, there has to be post-abortal care for the women undergoing MTP. 
Post-abortal care
 Follow up after abortion is a must especially after the tablets are 
given for medical abortion. 
 If the woman has any of the following symptoms, she should be 
immediately referred to the nearest functional FRU/District hospital.
 Severe bleeding or foul smelling discharge from uterus
 Severe pain in abdomen
 Fever
 Swelling in the abdomen or severe vomiting 
Counselling of the women will help them to seek safe abortions which will help in decreasing deaths among pregnant women. After an induced abortion, a woman can become pregnant again within six weeks. Hence, it is advisable for the woman (and her partner) to be counselled for appropriate contraception and help them to get the suitable contraceptive if they wish to adopt.It is important to remember:
 Termination of pregnancy below 
20 weeks is legal under provision of MTP Act.25 UNSAFE ABORTIONS & MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY (MTP) 
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA:
 You should educate families and the community about the dangers of 
unsafe abortion 
  You should know 
1. which are the centres/institutions approved by government for performing 
MTP near your village
2. the days when MTP is done 
3. the expense if any.
 You can escort these women to the approved centres, if needed. 
 Advise the women that although abortions can be done up to 20 weeks of 
pregnancy, yet it is safer for the women to get it done before 12 weeks. 
 Educate them about the need to use effective contraception after undergoing 
an abortion, so as to minimize the need for further abortions.Immunization
7
Immunization is one of the most well-known and cost effective methods 
of preventing diseases. Though most of the Vaccine Preventable Diseases (VPDs) are controlled by now, immunization has to be sustained, not only to prevent VPDs, but also a) to eliminate Tetanus, b) reduce the incidence of Measles and c) eradicate Poliomyelitis. 
The six vaccine preventable diseases are
DPT Immunization Tetanus
 Poliomyelitis
 Diphtheria
 Pertussis (whooping cough)
 Measles
 Childhood tuberculosis
The vaccines must be given at the right age, right dose, right interval and the full course must be completed to ensure the best possible protection to the child against these diseases. The schedule that tells us when and how many doses of each vaccine are to be given is called immunization schedule. 27
NATIONAL IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE FOR CHILDREN AND 
PREGNANT WOMEN 
NAME OF 
VACCINEWHEN TO GIVE DOSE ROUTE SITE
For Pregnant Women
TT-1 or Booster Early in pregnancy 0.5 ml Intramuscular Upper Arm
TT-2 4 weeks after TT-1 0.5 ml Intramuscular Upper Arm
For Infants
BCG At birth or any time up to 
one year1.1 ml0.05ml (up to 1 month)Intradermal Left Upper 
Arm
OPV-0 At birth if delivery is in institution, but can be given up to 2 weeks.2 drops Oral Oral
OPV 1,2 & 3 At 6 weeks, 10 weeks & 14 
weeks but can be given up to 5 years 2 drops Oral Oral
DPT 1,2 & 3 At 6 weeks, 10 weeks & 14 
weeks but can be given up to 2 years. 0.5 ml Intramuscular Mid-outer 
thigh
Measles 9 Months (9-12 months); should be given up to 5 years0.5 ml Subcutaneous Right upper 
Arm
Vitamin-A At 9 months with measles 1 ml Oral Oral
For Children
DPT booster 16-24 months 0.5 ml I/M Mid-outer thigh
OPV Booster 16-24 months 2 drops Oral Oral
Vitamin-A
•  16 months with DPT/OPV 
booster 
•  24 months, 30 months & 
36 months.
(Minimum interval between two doses is 6 months) 2 ml Oral Oral
DT 5 years 0.5 ml. Intramuscular Upper Arm
TT 10 years & 16 years 0.5 ml Intramuscular Upper ArmIMMUNIZATION28 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
If a child is not given the right vaccines 
in time, it is necessary to get them started whenever possible and complete the primary immunization before the child reaches its first birthday.
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA:
 You should be well versed with the National Immunization Schedule.
 You should be aware of the number of children less than one year of age 
in your village.
 Assist AWW and ANM in making the arrangements for immunization in 
AWC.
 You should advise the mother to bring the immunization card every time 
she comes with the child for immunization.
 You should advise the mothers on use of Auto Disable (AD) syringes for 
immunizations, which come in pre-sterilized packs with a fixed needle. This helps in prevention of infection.
 You should help the mother in correct positioning of the child during 
immunization.
 Counsel the mothers that minor ailments, such as fever, cough, cold etc. 
are not a contra-indication for immunization. 
 You should guide the mothers regarding minor side effects after 
immunization
 Mild fever
 Baby has Mild rash after measles immunization
 Pain, tenderness and swelling at the site of injection
 All these can be managed by giving ¼th tablet of Paracetamol.
 Baby should be referred to PHC/FRU if after immunization
 Baby is crying for more than three hours.
 High-grade fever.
 Baby is drowsy, convulsing or unconscious.
 You should ensure that all babies are immunized. Help AWW in tracking 
dropouts especially orphans and the children of migrants. 
 You should also know about the incentive money in immunization and from 
whom to get the same and when.As ASHA, ensure that all children in your village and nearby area are fully immunized before their first birthday.Diarrhoea
8
Diarrhoea is defined as passage of liquid or watery stools. These watery 
stools are usually passed more than three times in a day. Passage of even one large watery motion among children can be labelled as diarrhoea. Normally there are three types of diarrhoea:
 Acute watery diarrhoea starts suddenly and may continue for a number 
of days but not more than 14 days. Most of these are self-limiting and will last for three to seven days.
 Dysentery is diarrhoea with visible blood in stools.
 Persistent diarrhoea begins acutely but is of unusually long duration 
i.e. lasting more than 14 days.
Diarrhoeal diseases are a major cause of death and disease among children under five years. Majority of the deaths in diarrhoea are due to dehydration (loss of water and minerals). 
Four golden rules to observe if a child has diarrhoea
 If the child is breastfed, continue breast-feeding more frequently.
 If the child has started consuming other foods, continue feeding small 
quantities of these items. 30 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
  After the child recovers and 
normal appetite reappears, 
the child may be given more food than normal to regain lost weight.
 Give extra fluids
 Give ORS (Oral Rehydration 
Solution)
 Advise the mothers to give Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS). You must 
have adequate stock of ORS, being the depot-holder, especially in the monsoon season and during any outbreak of diarrhoea.
 Guide the mothers for preparing ORS. Take one litre of clean drinking 
water in a clean container after washing your hands with soap and water. Add one packet of ORS in it and stir it thoroughly so that the powder is mixed. Cover the vessel. One teaspoon of ORS should be given every one-two minutes to infants as per the table below: 
Advise the mothers to give Home Available Fluids (HAF) e.g. plain 
clean water, lassi, shikanji
Upto 2 months 2  months up to 2 years 2 years and more
5 Spoons ¼ - ½ cup ½ - 1 cup
Give more if the child wants
(Do a demonstration of preparation of ORS)
Fig. 39 Fig. 40 Fig. 41 Fig. 42
Wash your hands 
with soapPour all the ORS powder 
into a container having 
capacity of 1 litreMeasure 1 litre of 
drinking water & pour 
it in containerStir well until the 
powder is mixed 
thoroughly1. Continue feeding
2. Give extra fluids3. Give ORS4. Refer in case of danger 
signs31
Diarrhoea can be prevented by 
 Giving exclusive breastfeeding for THE FIRST six months.
 Thorough hand washing before cooking food and feeding the child.
 Keeping containers clean for preparing the food and for feeding the 
baby. 
 Keeping the food covered.
 Keeping drinking water covered.
 Consuming freshly prepared food within one hour.
 Keeping the house and neighbouring area clean and proper disposal 
of waste so that houseflies don’t breed.
 Advising the families about getting the sanitary latrines constructed 
in the households.
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA:
 Advise the families about chlorination of water in case of floods 
etc. 
 Refer in case of danger signs
 You should advise the family to take babies to the FRU immediately 
if the following danger signs/symptoms are there 
 Child becomes lethargic 
 Not able to drink or breast feed
 Blood appears in the stool
 Does not pass urine for eight hours
 You should know the location of FRU so that you can advise/ 
escort the mothers/families with the babies to the FRU.DIARRHOEAAcute Respiratory 
Infection
9
Acute Respiratory Infection (ARI) is an 
important cause of mortality and morbidity in children. Most children up to the age of five years are susceptible to ARI. If not treated in time some of them develop pneumonia, which can result in death. The child has some or all of the following symptoms:
 Cough
 Running nose
 Fever 
 Difficulty in breathing. 
Serious morbidity and death are preventable if it is identified early and treated/referred in time. 
Care during coughs & colds 
 Keep the child warm.
 Give plenty of fluids and continue breast-feeding.
 Give home remedies – ginger, honey, lemon, kadha, etc.
Respiratory Rate33
 Increase feeds after the child recovers.
 Enough rest is to be taken by the child.
 Giving immunization to children on time for vaccine preventable 
diseases also helps.
 Timely administration of Vitamin A. 
 Good nutrition and avoiding exposure to cold, dust and smoke will 
help in preventing pneumonia.
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA:
 Advise about feeding the child: the feeding should be continued during 
illness and the frequency of feeding increased after illness
 Clear the nose if it interferes with feeding (use saline and a moistened 
wick to help soften the mucus).
 Increase fluids; give the child extra fluids to drink.
 Soothe the throat and relieve cough with a home remedy such as lemon 
with honey and ginger, tulsi, warm water etc.
 Control fever using Paracetamol.
 Keep the baby warm.
 You should accompany the parents in taking the child to the nearest health 
facility if the child has any of the following danger signals:
 Fast breathing.
 Difficulty in breathing.
 Unable to drink.
 Lethargy (susti).ACUTE RESPIRATORY INFECTIONInfant and Young 
Child Nutrition: Breastfeeding and Complementary Feeding
10
Nutrition is required for a child to grow, develop, and remain active 
and to reach adulthood without illness. Nutrients such as carbohydrates, fats, proteins are required in large amounts (macro nutrients), while some nutrients e.g. Vitamins, Iron, Calcium, Iodine etc. are required in minimum amounts (micro nutrients). Growth of the child can be assessed by plotting height & weight for the age in Road to Health Chart. If the child is not growing properly, it means the child is malnourished i.e. under nourished. 
Nutrition in children is divided according to age as is given below:
0-6 months exclusive breastfeeding 
  Infants up to six months are to be exclusively 
breast-fed. Feed at least eight times a day.
  Mothers should be encouraged to breast-feed on demand.
  Bottle-feeding should be discouraged and anxious mothers should be reassured. 
  Breast milk is the ideal food for young infants as it contains all nutrients. 
35
Infant and Young 
Child Nutrition: Breastfeeding and Complementary Feeding Chances of malnutrition in breast-fed infants are less.
 It prevents infection, as it is clean and free from bacteria. 
 Colostrum acts as the first immunization for infants.
 Breastfeeding enhances brain development 
 Breastfeeding increases mother and child bonding and helps in better 
development of the child.
6-12 months complementary feeding 
 Start home based complementary foods after six months 
four-five times a day.
 Continue breastfeeding as often as the child wants.
 If the child is not breastfed, it may be given undiluted 
milk by a cup and complementary food five times a day. Wash hands before feeding.
 Food should be mashed and it should be freshly prepared. 
12 months-two years
  Continue breastfeeding for two years or beyond. Give 
home based food four-five times a day 
Two years onwards
  Children should be given hence-cooked food five-six 
times a day as they eat in small quantities.
  Children should be weighed every three months to assess 
their growth in all age groups.
Malnutrition in children 
 A child with severe malnutrition is at risk of dying from 
various infectious diseases.
 All children less than two years of age should be assessed 
and the parents should be counselled.
 Additionally, children who appear weak or appear smaller 
for age need counselling to improve their nutrition.
Malnutrition in children
INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD NUTRITION: BREASTFEEDING AND COMPLEMENTARY FEEDING36 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA: 
 Support women to breast feed exclusively up to six months
 Educate families about complementary feeding, demonstrate preparing 
complementary foods
 Counsel the mothers to take the children for weighing at AWC at least 
once in every three months and look for under nourished children
 Counsel mothers not to ignore nutritional needs of girl child
 You should advise mothers regarding the availability of supplementary food 
from AWC and ensure that all eligible children get their entitlement from 
the AWW
 Track the undernourished children and ensure that they get the supplementary 
food regularly. The weight gain in these children should be checked at regular intervals.
Feeding during illness
Food intake of infants and young children decreases during illness, however the energy requirement increases. Hence, it is important to know how and when the ill child should be fed.
As ASHA you should:
 Advise the mothers that feeding should be continued even during 
illness.
 Food should be given in small amounts but more frequently.
 Simple home-cooked food should be given, which is easily digestible.
 Advise mothers to continue breast-feeding more frequently for a few days 
after an episode of illness.
 Advise the mothers not to dilute the dal or other foods for the baby. Take 
out food for the child and then add spices in the food for rest of the family. Add a spoonful of butter/ghee/oil in the baby’s food.37
Micro nutrients (Vitamin A, Iron, Iodine)
Vitamin ‘A’ Deficiency 
Vitamin A is important for normal vision though in very small amounts. It 
is not possible for even that amount to be synthesized in the body. Vitamin A deficiency is most common between six months and three years. It can even cause even blindness. Night blindness is an earliest symptom. 
Iron deficiency anaemia
In children it is very common because of inadequate diet and recurrent infections and worm infestations. Give one small iron tablet daily for 100 days in a year to children under five years.Roles and responsibilities of ASHA:
As ASHA, you should advise the mothers regarding:
 Six monthly doses of Vitamin A to be given to children between six months 
to three years.
 Increase intake of carrots, green leafy vegetables, yellow fruits, eggs, milk, 
fish etc. in food.
 You should assist ANM/AWW in tracking dropouts and give Vitamin A to 
children suffering from measles.  
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA:
 Advise regarding proper nutrition with iron and protein rich diet (jaggery, 
milk, eggs, pulses, green leafy vegetables, guavas, apples, etc.).
 Advise regarding prevention of diarrhoea and importance of de-worming.
 Inform that iron can cause dark discoloration of stools/increased or 
decreased frequency of stools.INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD NUTRITION: BREASTFEEDING AND COMPLEMENTARY FEEDING38 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Iodine deficiency
Iodine is a very important trace element. It is required for the normal growth 
and development of human beings. Its deficiency during pregnancy can lead to spontaneous abortion/still birth and cretinism/mental retardation in children.
You should advise the pregnant women to take iodized salt in food, which 
is enough to prevent the iodine deficiency.Fever
11
Fever is a common symptom of many diseases, which may be simple or 
serious. Some mild fevers subside without any treatment/treatment at home e.g. fever with no cough/running nose/ear discharge/with no rash/without diarrhoea/without any obvious infection etc. However, in many children it may be a symptom of an acute severe illness. For fever in children a blood smear examination should be done. 
Temperature and fever
Our body is warm both in summer and winter. When it is very hot outside, our body perspires. It releases water and cools like an earthen pot. When it is very cold outside our body shivers to generate heat. In all seasons our body remains warm enough to maintain all its functions. The normal body temperature is just above 36
0C or 980F.
After an attack by germs, our body works very fast. It generates more heat and hence fever. But excess fever may be harmful and lead to several complications.
40 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Measuring fever in adults
It is wise to take a sick person’s temperature even if 
she/he does not mention about having fever. Touch your own forehead and the person’s forehead with both sides of your hand. If the person’s forehead is warmer than yours, she/he may have fever. This is a simple way to find out if someone has fever or not. 
Thermometer is used for measuring temperature
    Take a simple oral thermometer and shake it well. 
See that its mercury mark is below normal (36°C or 98.4°F). Do not hold or touch the bulb of the thermometer. Hold the thermometer by the bigger end with no mercury because mercury line will go up and you might get a wrong reading.
  Put the thermometer’s bulb end under the tongue in the patient’s mouth or armpit for two minutes.
 The oral temperature is a bit higher than the armpit. 
 Take it out to see closely while turning it slowly.
 Record the temperature of a sick person. Is it more than 
36°C/98.4°F?
 Temperature of 37°C–39°C is mild fever.
 Between 39°C and 40°C is moderate fever. 
 Above 40°C it is high fever (refer any person with high fever after 
sponging and tablet Paracetamol). 
 Clean it with water after each use.
 For your information, thermometers have mercury inside which is toxic 
and hence adequate care should be taken when used for children.
Treating Fever
General treatment
 Mild fever generally needs no treatment unless we are thinking of 
some infections like malaria, TB, pneumonia etc.
 For moderate fever Paracetamol tablet is the best treatment. One 
tablet thrice a day is enough for adults. For more details see table 
41
on drugs in Book 1. Give tablet Paracetamol for two days. For high 
fever, tepid water sponging is good first aid, with Paracetamol tablets. If fever doesn’t come down with in two days, refer to the nearest health facility. Sponge the whole body with tepid water. Do not use cold water as it causes shivers. Do not give a blanket. Keep windows open
 Give enough water and fluids to drink.
 Light meals like khichadi, daal-rice, curd, dalia are soft and easily 
digested.
 Fever is the symptom of a disease. It is not a disease in itself. 
Paracetamol tablet or syrup is general remedy for fever. It only brings down the temperature. It is not a fever-cure since it does not kill the causative germs. For common colds and coughs, Paracetamol or herbal remedies are good enough and no other treatment is necessary. 
Some home remedies for fever
Home remedies soothe the effects of fever. Give her:
Gulvel kadha
Take a thumb thick piece of Gulvel. Add two-teaspoonful powder of dry ginger. Add 10-12 glasses of water. Boil on slow fire. When three glass full decoction remains, cool it. Give half a glass of freshly made decoction.
China grass tea
Tea prepared with China grass is a refreshing decoction for someone suffering from simple fever. 
Specific treatment for illness
For illnesses due to various germs we need to give specific medicines. Malaria, pneumonia, TB, etc need specific medicines other than Paracetamol. However viral illnesses have no specific remedies. Virus is a very small germ causing many fever-illnesses. Common cold, flu, dengue, jaundice etc are viral illnesses. 
Remember several serious illnesses may be connected with fever e.g., 
malaria, pneumonia, pus (anywhere) typhoid, TB, kala azar, filariasis, brain fever, HIV/AIDS etc. We will learn about them. As a thumb rule, do not wait for more than two days for cure.FEVER42 READING MATERIAL FOR ASHA
Roles and responsibilities of ASHA:
 Advise the mothers/families to take the child to PHC immediately if:
 a child is less than two months old.
 there is fever with unconsciousness/drowsiness.
 there is fever with convulsions.
 there is with fever, child not able to drink.
 there is fever for more than five days.
 You should know the fever cases in your village and help malaria workers 
in getting blood samples from these fever cases.
 You should also know in which months of the year fever is common in your 
village. As a depot holder you should have adequate stock of chloroquine 
with you during these months.
 Give chloroquine tablets to children with fever as per the recommended 
dose. Ensure that children take complete treatment.
 For more information on prevention of malaria, please refer to chapter on 
malaria.