ASHA Module 6
Skills
that  Save Lives
Focus on Maternal and Newborn HealthPart A
Being an ASHA 1ASHA Module 6
Skills
that  Save Lives3Contents
PART A: Being an ASHA 5 
1. Role of ASHA 7
2. Activities of an ASHA’s  8
3. Measurable Outcomes of the ASHA Programme 9
4. Essential Skills for an ASHA 10
5. Qualities that Make an ASHA Eﬀ  ective  12
6. Conducting a Home Visit   13
7. Village Health and Nutrition Day (VHND)  15
8. What Records do the ASHA Maintain 17
9. ASHA Support and Supervision  18
PART B: Maternal Health  19 
1. Pregnancy Diagnosis  21
2. Birth Preparedness for a Safe Delivery 26
3. Management of Anaemia 28
4. Identifying complications during Pregnancy and Delivery 30
5. Care during Delivery 34
6. Post-Partum Care  38
PART C: Newborn Health 41
1. Care of the Baby at the time of Delivery 43
2. Schedule of Home Visits for the care of the Newborn 44
3. Examining the Newborn at Birth 44
4. Breastfeeding 50
5. Keeping the Newborn Warm 57
6. Management of fever in newborn 60
Annexes 61
ContentsASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
4About this book
The sixth and seventh modules cover areas whose content is already 
familiar to the ASHA. In addition, this module includes the development of speciﬁ  c competencies in healthcare for mothers and children. It is thus, 
intended to serve as a refresher module, building on existing knowledge and the development of new skills in the area of maternal and child health. ASHAs that are newly recruited into the programme, could directly start with Module 5, 6 and 7. This module is also designed to serve as a reading material for ASHAs, and is therefore, to be given to each ASHA. A companion communication kit for the ASHA to use when she conducts home visits and village meetings has also been developed. There is also a manual for trainers with training aids to use during the training of ASHA. The training plan envisages a total of 20 to 24 days of residential training, to impart the skills that these two modules are teaching.  
Acknowledgements
The sections on maternal and newborn care are excerpted from the SEARCH Manual on ‘How to Train ASHA in Home-Based Newborn Care’ and SEARCH developed ASHA Reading Material on Home-Based Newborn Care. Thanks are due to Members of the National ASHA Mentoring Group, United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Breastfeeding Promotion Network of India (BPNI), the Public Health Resource Network (PHRN), and the training,  maternal and child health and malaria divisions of the ministry for providing extensive feedback, and also HLFPPT for providing information on Nischay Kit. The Integrated Management of Neonatal Childhood Illnesses (IMNCI) package is also incorporated into these modules. PART A
Being an 
ASHAPart A
Being an ASHA
 7Being an ASHA
1. Role of ASHA
ASHA is considered to be a healthcare facilitator and provider of a limited 
range of healthcare services. Health rights would be integral to her work and would be focused in the areas of community mobilisation to improve health status, access to services, and promote people’s participation in health programmes. 
PART A
Didi, which day is the ANM 
coming to our village?
Didi, they are charging me at the govt 
hospital and I don’t have the money to 
pay – can you help me?This is the first day of diarrhoea. Do 
I have go to the far away town or is 
there something you can suggest?Objectives of this Session
By the end of this session, the ASHA will learn about:• The role of an ASHA and the activities expected of her.
• The health outcomes that her work should result in.• The sets of skills that she needs to be eﬀ  ective in.
• The records that she has to maintain.
• The arrangements for her support and supervision.
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
82. Activities of an ASHA 
ASHA’s work consists mainly of ﬁ  ve activities:
1. Home Visits: For two to three hours every day, for at 
least four or ﬁ  ve days a week, the ASHA should visit the 
families living in her allo/g308  ed area. Home visits should 
take place at least once in a month if not more. Home 
visits are mainly for health promotion and preventive 
care. Over time, families will come to her when there is 
a problem and she would not have to go so o/g286  en to their 
houses. Meeting them anywhere in the community/
village is enough. However, where there is a child 
below two years of age or any malnourished child or a 
pregnant woman, she should visit the families at home 
for counselling them. Also, if there is a newborn in the 
house, a series of ﬁ  ve visits or more becomes essential.  
2. A/g308  ending the Village Health and Nutrition Day 
(VHND): On one day every month, when the Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM) comes to provide immunisation and other services in the village, ASHA will promote a/g308  endance by those who need the Anganwadi or ANM services and helps with service delivery. 
3. Visits to the health facility: This is usually 
accompanying a pregnant woman or some other neighbour who requests her services for escort. The visit could also be to a/g308  end a training programme or review meeting. In some months, there would be only one visit, in others, there would be more.
4. Holding village level meeting  of women’s groups, and 
the Village Health and Sanitation Commi/g308  ee (VHSC), 
for increasing health awareness and to plan health work.
5. Maintain records which would make her more 
organised and make her work easier, and help her to plan be/g308  er for the health of the people.
The ﬁ  rst three relate to facilitation or provision of healthcare 
and the last two are supportive and mobilisational activities. 
Part A
Being an ASHA
 93. Measurable Outcomes of the ASHA Programme
In the course of conducting these ﬁ  ve activities, the ASHA should ensure the 
following: 
Maternal Health 
1. That every pregnant woman and her family receive health information for 
promotion of appropriate healthcare practices – diet, rest and for increased use of services which would focus on care in pregnancy, delivery, postnatal care and family planning services. 
2. That every pregnant woman avails of antenatal care and postnatal care at the 
monthly health worker clinic/VHND.
3. That every family with a pregnant woman has made a plan and is prepared for 
the event of childbirth. 
4. That every couple that needs contraceptive services is counselled on where to 
avail of the service. 
Newborn and Child Health 
1. That every newborn is visited as per the schedule, more o/g286  en if there are 
problems and receives essential home-based care as well as appropriate referral for the sick newborn.
2. That every family receives the information and support it needs to access 
immunisation.
3. That all families with children below the age of two years are counselled and 
supported for – prevention and management of malnutrition and anaemia and for prevention of illness such as malaria, recurrent diarrhoea and respiratory infection. 
4. That every child below ﬁ  ve years with diarrhoea, fever, Acute Respiratory 
Infection (ARI) and worms, brought to her a/g308  ention is counselled on whether referral is immediately required or whether, given the problems of access to a doctor, ﬁ  rst contact curative care with home remedies and drugs in her kit, the child can be managed.
Disease Control
1. That those individuals noticed during home visits as having chronic cough or 
blindness or a skin patch in a high leprosy block are referred to the appropriate centre for further check-up. 
2. That those prescribed a long course of drugs for tuberculosis or leprosy or surgery 
for cataract are followed up and encouraged to take the drugs or go for surgery.
3. That those with fever which could be malaria (or kala – azar) have their blood 
tested to detect the disease and provide appropriate care/referral.
4. That the village and health authorities are alerted to any outbreak of disease she 
notes during her visits. 
Note: Each outcome is not a separate activity. They are part of the protocol 
followed during a single activity _ the home visit.ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
104. Essential Skills for an ASHA
The essential skills that an ASHA requires can be classiﬁ  ed into six sets. 
These are simple skills requiring only a few hours to learn, but they can save thousands of lives. These six sets of skills are given below:
1. Maternal Care
a. Counselling of pregnant 
women
b. Ensuring complete antenatal 
care through home visits and 
enabling care at VHND
c. Making the birth plan and 
support for safe delivery 
d. Undertaking post-partum 
visits, Counselling for family planning.
2. Newborn Care when visiting the 
newborn at home:
a. Counselling and problem solving on 
breastfeeding
b. Keeping the baby warm
c. Identification and basic 
management of LBW (Low Birth Weight) and pre-term baby
d. Examinations needed for 
identification/first contract care for sepsis and asphyxia
3. Child Care  
a. Providing home care for diarrhoea, Acute 
Respiratory Infections (ARI), fever and appropriate referral, when required
b. Counselling for feeding during illnessc. Temperature managementd. De-worming and treatment of iron deficiency 
anaemia, with referral where required
e. Counselling to prevent recurrent illness especially 
diarrhoea.Part A
Being an ASHA
 11
6. Social Mobilisation
a. Conducting women’s group meetings 
and VHSC meetings
b. Assisting in making village health plans
c. Enabling marginalised and vulnerable 
communities to be able to access health services.4. Nutrition
a. Counselling and 
support for exclusive breastfeeding
b. Counselling mothers 
on complementary feeding
c. Counselling 
and referral of malnourished children.
5. Infections
a. Identifying persons whose 
symptoms are suggestive of malaria, leprosy, tuberculosis, etc. during home visits, community level care and referral 
b. Encouraging those who 
are put on treatment to take their drugs regularly
c. Encouraging the village 
community to take collective action to prevent spread of these infections and individuals to protect themselves from getting infected.
In addition, there are important skills related to self-awareness, communication, and organising a meeting which have been already taught in Module 5.ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
12For an ASHA to be eﬀ  ective in improving people’s access to health services 
and their health status, an ASHA should:
• Have the knowledge and skills to explain the basic maternal and child 
health services, educate on preventive and promotive aspects of maternal 
and child health, and provide some measure of immediate relief and advice if there is any illness.
• Have the knowledge and skills on other general health issues, especially 
related to common infections, and be able to provide information on access to services and preventive and promotive aspects of healthcare.
• Be friendly and polite with people and known among community, and 
establish rapport with the family during household visits.
• Be a special friend to the needy, the marginalised, and the less powerful.
• Possess the art of listening.• Have the skill of coordination with Panchayati Raj Institution (PRI), AWW 
and ANM.
• Be competent in conducting meetings in the community.• Be motivated and feel happy and rewarded to help community/serve 
people.
• Have a positive a/g308  itude and be keen to learn new skills.5. Qualities that Make an ASHA Effective
Part A
Being an ASHA
 136. Conducting a Home Visit  
The purpose of the home visit is to interact 
with the family, especially the young women of the house, so as to develop a rapport with them, communicate key health messages, support them for be/g308  er 
healthcare practices, identify illness early and provide appropriate advice. 
In particular, homes with a pregnant woman, or a woman who had an 
abortion or delivery within the last one month, or with any child below two or any malnourished child needs regular home visits. 
The ﬁ  rst step is to gather information to understand the situation. You should 
ask appropriate initial questions, listen to the woman’s response actively, 
and do not interrupt the woman while she is speaking. Once the mother has ﬁ  nished, ask further questions to clarify what she has said. Then seek 
more information by asking more detailed and probing questions about the duration of illness and the symptoms.
The second step a/g286  er listening is to ﬁ  rst praise the mother for how she 
is managing and reinforce the correct actions she is taking. Then make suggestions to the mother/woman on what further she needs to do – in short sentences and in clear blocks of information. Repeat the key information to make sure that the mother has understood it. You should ask whether the 
All Visits
(Basic communication skills to create friendly environment)
• Greeting.
• Explain why she is visiting today.
• Act in a way so family feels they can confide in her.
• Speak in a gentle tone.
• Use simple words in local language.
• Be respectful.
• Praise what the woman is doing correctly and build up her self-confidence.
• Point out why you are discouraging some health practices; do not merely 
condemn it or brand it as bad, superstition etc. 
• Ask, don’t tell. 
• Check if the woman has any questions.
• Answer in simple language.
• Thank the woman after the visit and inform the family when you (ASHA) will 
return.
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
14suggestion is applicable and acceptable, and whether she would be able to 
implement it. If necessary, ask the woman to repeat what has been suggested. Discuss further and come to an understanding of what can be done 
Then the third step,  you should discuss and try to correct any 
misconceptions or rumours. Finally, you should also arrange for follow-up visit or referral. Do NOT “prescribe” health advice: You need to “counsel.” See the examples 
below: 
Gratuitous Ineffective Messages Useful Health Communication Message
To prevent diarrhoea, pay attention 
to cleanliness. To prevent diarrhoea, please ensure that you wash your hands with soap and water before preparing food or feeding the child and after cleaning up after defecation.
Take good care of the child. Are you able to find enough time to feed the 
child? To play with the child? Who looks after the child when you are at work?
Your child is now one year old. You must give it nutritious food. Would it be possible for you to give your child an egg daily (or milk, green vegetables etc)? How would you manage it? Can you afford it? Would other children in the family also demand it, and would that create a problem?
Difficult Situations
If the woman is shy
• Speak of general things to ‘warm her up’.
• Encourage the woman to speak.
• Praise the woman more to make her confident.
• Repeat the questions.
If the woman is non-cooperative or argumentative 
• Praise the women to make her feel secure.
• Sympathise with her and be friendly; do not get angry.
• Spend more time in listening to her. 
• Do not push if the woman is still not immediately receptive but just say that 
you would like to come again. 
If the woman is curious and asks many questions
• Answer her questions in simple language.
• Explain that you will be coming every month so they can talk again.
Part A
Being an ASHA
 157. Village Health and Nutrition Day (VHND) 
VHND is a common platform for allowing the people to access the services of 
the ANM and the male health worker and of the Anganwadi Centre (AWC). It is held at the AWC once every month. The ANM gives immunisation to the children, provides antenatal care to pregnant women and provides counselling and contraceptive services to eligible couples. In addition, the ANM provides a basic level of curative care for minor illness with referral where needed. 
The VHND is an occasion for health communication on a number of key 
health issues. It should be a/g308  ended by the members of the PRI, particularly the women members, pregnant women, women with children under two, adolescent girls and general community members. The VHND is to be seen as a major mobilisation event to reinforce health messages. You should provide information on the topics given below during the VHND. These topics can be taken up one by one and completed over a period of one year. 
Topics for Health Communication during the VHND 
• Care in pregnancy, including nutrition, importance of antenatal care and 
danger sign recognition. 
• Planning for safe deliveries and postnatal care.
• Exclusive breastfeeding and the importance of appropriate 
complementary feeding.
• Immunisation: the schedule and the importance of adhering to it.• Importance of safe drinking water, hygiene and sanitation, and discussion 
on what actions can be taken locally to improve the situation. 
• Delaying the age at marriage, postponing the ﬁ  rst pregnancy and the need 
for spacing.
• Adolescent health awareness, including nutrition, retention in school till 
high/higher secondary level, anaemia correction, menstrual hygiene and 
responsible sexual behaviour. 
• Prevention of Malaria, TB and other 
communicable diseases.
• Awareness on prevention and seeking care 
for RTI/STI and HIV/AIDS.
• Prevention of tobacco use and alcoholism.
What should you do for a successful 
VHND?
• Make a list of the following and ensure 
their presence during the VHND meeting:
/rhombus6  Pregnant women for their antenatal or 
postnatal care. 
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
16/rhombus6  Women who need to come for ANC for ﬁ  rst time or for repeat visit.
/rhombus6  Infants who need their next dose of immunisation.
/rhombus6  Malnourished children.
/rhombus6  TB patients who are on anti-TB drugs.
/rhombus6  Those with fever who have not been able to see a doctor. 
/rhombus6  Eligible couples who need contraceptive services or counselling.
/rhombus6  Any others who want to meet the ANM.
• Specially identifying families who are new migrants, living in hamlets 
or are vulnerable because of poverty or otherwise marginalised and 
ensuring their a/g308  endance.
• Coordinate with the AWW and the ANM to know in advance which day 
the VHND is scheduled so as to inform those who need these services and the community, especially the VHSC members. 
• Undertake a part of the health communication work done at the VHND. Part A
Being an ASHA
 17c. Drug Kit 
Stock Register
b. ASHA Diary
8. What Records do the ASHA Maintain
A village health register that:
a.  Village Health 
Register
a. Village Health Register in which you will record details of pregnant 
women, children, 0-5 years, eligible couples and others in need of services.
b. An ASHA diary which is a record of your work and also useful for 
tracking performance based payments due to you.
c. Maintaining drug kit stocks: You are provided with a drug kit so as to be 
able to treat minor ailments/problems. The drug kit contains: Paracetomol 
tablets, Albendazole tablets, Iron Folic Acid (IFA) tablets, Chloroquine tablets, Oral Rehydration Salts (ORS), and eye ointment. In addition, the kit may contain condoms and oral contraceptive pills, pregnancy testing kits, and malaria testing kits. The contents of the kit may change depending on the needs of the state. 
 The drug kit is to be re-ﬁ  lled on a regular basis from the nearest PHC. To 
keep a record of consumption of the drugs, and for eﬀ  ective re-ﬁ  lling and 
ensuring adequate/timely availability, a drug kit stock card is maintained. This can be completed by the person who reﬁ  lls the kit or by you. 
 (Annexe 1: Sample drug kit stock card)ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
189. ASHA Support and Supervision 
• For ASHA to be eﬀ  ective and for her skills to be 
updated, she needs both on-the-job support and 
refresher trainings. 
• Each ASHA will be supported in the ﬁ  eld by an 
ASHA facilitator.
• The ASHA facilitator will interact with ASHA at 
least twice if not thrice a month. 
• At least one of these interactions will be in the 
form of a “mentoring” visit to the hamlet where she provides her services. This would focus on mentoring or on-the-job training. 
• Another one or two interactions would be in a local review meeting. This 
could be held at Gram Panchayat (GP) level, or at the sector level or even at the block level. 
• Each of the facilitators will have a clear protocol of activities to follow 
for the mentoring visit to the ASHAs and for the review meetings. The purpose of these interactions are:
a Collecting health related information as observed by ASHA and 
information on what work ASHA is doing.
b For providing support to the ASHA to manage the health problems 
they encounter.
c For providing training and refresh or update their knowledge and 
skills.
d For helping ASHAs plan their work.e For building up mutual solidarity and motivation.f For troubleshooting problems, especially as regards payments and 
addressing grievances. 
g For reﬁ  lls to their drug kit
• The Medical Oﬃ   cer In-charge of the block PHC/CHC should a/g308  end at 
least one monthly meeting of all ASHAs in the Primary Health Centre 
(PHC) area, to review work progress.PART B
Maternal
Health21 Maternal HealthPart BMaternal Health
1. Pregnancy Diagnosis 
Diagnosis of pregnancy should be done as early as possible a/g286  er the ﬁ  rst missed period. 
There are two ways to diagnose pregnancy early:
• Missed Periods
• Pregnancy testing: through use of the Nischay home pregnancy test card 
/rhombus6 The Nischay test card can be used easily by you to test if a woman is pregnant. 
/rhombus6 The test can be done immediately a/g286  er the missed period. 
/rhombus6 A positive test means that the woman is pregnant. 
/rhombus6 The beneﬁ  t of early diagnosis of pregnancy is that the woman can be 
registered early by the ANM and start ge/g308  ing antenatal care soon. 
/rhombus6 A negative test means that the woman is not pregnant. In case she is not 
pregnant and does not want to get pregnant, you should counsel her to adopt 
a family planning method.
/rhombus6 The result of the test should be kept conﬁ  dential.
Instructions for the use of the Nishcay Kit are in Annexe 2.
PART B
 1 All knowledge areas in this chapter have been covered in ASHA Module 2.
Objectives of this session
By the end of the session the ASHA will learn about:
• Diagnosing pregnancy using Nischay Kit.
• Determining Last Menstrual Period (LMP) and Expected Date of Delivery (EDD).• Key components of antenatal check-up
1. 
• Identiﬁ  cation of problems and danger signs during the antenatal period and appropriate referral.
• Provide appropriate care for anaemia.• Developing plans for birth preparedness. • Follow-up with pregnant women. • Knowledge of safe delivery. • Understand obstetric emergencies and enable appropriate referral for emergencies.• Updating Maternal Health Cards with support from the ANM.
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
22 Determining LMP and EDD
When pregnancy is diagnosed, you should help the pregnant woman in 
calculating the probable date when she is likely to deliver. 
Steps to ﬁ  nd the EDD• Find out from the woman the date of the ﬁ  rst day of her LMP .• Then count nine months a/g286  er that date.• Add seven days to that date.For example, If the ﬁ  rst day of the LMP is:  10th Dec. 2009
Nine months later is: 10th Sept. 2010
Adding seven days is: 17th Sept. 2010
Therefore, the expected date of delivery is  17th September 2010
Note: This method only gives an approximate date of delivery, and baby may be 
born anytime during 15 days before or after the EDD. 
This picture drawn beside helps you in estimating the date of delivery.1
17152
3
4
5
6
7
98
10
11
12
13
14
16 1819202122232425262728293031
  1    2     3     4     5    6    7   8   9   10  11  12  1     2    3     4     5    6     7     8   9  10   11 12
2010 2011The Measuring Strip to Determine Change in YearThe Circle Aid for 
Determining Last Menstrual Period (LMP) and Expected Date of Delivery (EDD)
January
FebruaryMarch
April
MayJuneJuly
August
September
OctoberNovember
December
January
FebruaryMarch
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
Nov ember
December23 Maternal HealthPart BFacts about Antenatal Check-up
How many antenatal check-ups?
Four antenatal visits must be ensured, including registration within the first 
three month period. The suggested schedule is as below:
1st visit:  Within 12 weeks—preferably as soon as pregnancy is suspected—
for registration of pregnancy and first antenatal check-up
2nd visit:  Between 14 and 26 weeks
3rd visit:  Between 28 and 34 
weeks 
4th visit: After 36 weeks
It is advisable for the pregnant woman to visit the Medical Officer (MO) at the PHC for the third antenatal visit, as well as availing of the required investigations at the PHC.
• Early registration
• Regular weight check
• Blood test for anaemia 
• Urine test for protein and sugar
• Measure blood pressure
• One tablet of IFA every day 
for three months to prevent anaemia 
• Treatment for anaemia 
• Two doses of Tetanus Toxoid 
(TT) vaccine 
• Nutrition counselling
• Preparing for birth.
 2 The components of ANC have already been covered in Module 2.
Essential components2 of antenatal careASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
24Where are ANC services provided? 
The nearest place for ANC services for a woman is at the AWC during the monthly VHND. The pregnant w oman could also go to the Sub-Centre, 
where the 
ANM will provide ANC services. ANC services are also provided 
at the PHC or Community Health Centre (CHC) or district hospital.  
Identification of problems and danger signs
Given below are complications that can occur during the antenatal period for which pregnant w omen must seek treatment in an institution:
• 
Jaundice, high blood pressure, fever with chills, or bleeding
• Severe anaemia
• Women with protein and sugar in their urine• Swelling of feet, face and hands.Given below are danger signs for which pregnant women must seek delivery 
in a centre where they can manage complications including those requiring surgery and blood transfusion.
• Mothers who had a complication in a previous pregnancy 
(C section, prolonged labour, stillborn, neonatal death)
• Pregnant women with severe anaemia.• Pregnant women having any of the danger signs of the antenatal period 
which are still persisting at the time of delivery.
Some women are to be considered more at risk of developing complications 
during delivery and therefore, must opt for an institutional delivery. These include: 
• Young mothers (below 19 years of age)• Mothers who are over 40 years of age• Mothers who already have three children• Mothers who have excessive weight gain or do not gain enough weight.
Key tasks to be undertaken during ANC
• List all pregnant women: Ensure that you cover the women in the poorest 
families, and in any sections which tend to get le/g286   out, e.g. women from 
SC/ST communities, women living in hamlets far from the main village, or in hamlets that fall between villages and newly migrant women. 
• Educate pregnant women about care in pregnancy, especially on the 
importance of increased nutrition, rest, and complete ANC services.
25 Maternal HealthPart B• Emphasise the importance of a balanced and nutritious diet during 
pregnancy. The diet of the pregnant woman should contain a mix of 
cereals, pulses (including beans and nuts), vegetables including greens, milk, eggs, meat and ﬁ  sh. If possible, the family should be encouraged to add oils, jaggery and fruits to the diet. Meat and nuts are especially good for anaemic women. You should explain to the mother and family that no foods should be forbidden during pregnancy. 
• See when ANC is due for each check-up and remind them appropriately.
• Escort pregnant woman to VHND where they are hesitant or need such 
support.
• Ensure that all components of ANC are delivered.• Ensure that the Maternal Card is updated.
Planning for a Safe Delivery
You should
• Know how to calculate the EDD and communicate this to the pregnant woman.
• Know which institutions in the area provide different levels of care and establish linkages with 
providers there. 
• At least once before delivery, take the pregnant woman to this centre and introduce her to the 
providers.
• Know what transport is available _ whether funded by the state or other private means _ that is easily 
accessible and affordable and how to call on it when the need arises.
• Assist all pregnant women and families to prepare plans for birth: including identifying funding 
sources should money be required at short notice. Sometimes Self-Help Groups (SHGs) may advance 
money in emergency even if the woman is not a member. This is most important for women in remote hamlets, or in communities which are currently not availing of institutional delivery or those at high risk for complications. 
• Know what records (BPL card) need to be carried to the institution.
• Share birth plans with ANM and PHC MO at the VHND or monthly meeting.
• Identify mothers with complications, or a high likelihood of developing complications with support 
from the ANM. Inform them of the institutions that it is most advisable for them to go to and motivate the mother and the family to go there and escort them if required. ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
262. Birth Preparedness for a Safe Delivery
What is Birth Preparedness? 
This is a method of planning in advance by the pregnant mother and her family for a safe and comfortable deliv ery 
and for care a/g286  
er delivery. You should help every family 
make this plan in consultation with the ANM.
What are the choices available to the mother? 
1. If there are any danger signs or complications:  
Identify the nearest institution (CHC/District Hospital) which has the staﬀ   and equipment to provide 
Comprehensiv
e Emergency Obstetric and Newborn 
Care (CEmONC), and counsel the mother and the family to go there. 
2. If there are no complications: Counsel the mother to go to the PHC which is 
open 24 X 7, where there is a team of doctors and nurses or ANMs to conduct the delivery and provide care for the mother and newborn. These institutions can manage some complications and transfer immediately to a higher facility if complications requiring surgery or blood transfusion develop. The list of such institutions can be obtained from the ANM. The place should be clean and safe and friendly and have a skilled nurse or doctor at all times. The woman would have to stay there for 48 hours a/g286  er delivery. 
3. If there are no complications and mother and her family are reluctant or 
unable to go to the 24x7 PHC or if it is too far away:  Advise the mother 
could go the Sub-Centre, provided it is accredited as a delivery centre, which means the ANM has been trained as a Skilled Birth A/g308  endant (SBA), 
and is available, and there are minimum facilities for delivery.
4. If there are no complications or not a high risk case for developing 
complications and the mother and family insist on delivering at home, despite counselling: You could work with the ANM to enable a delivery 
by SBA. This should be agreed to only if you are sure that the family can organise transport and funds at very short notice. The SBA should be able to arrive within 30 minutes of the onset of labour at the home/Sub-Centre and should able to stay through the process of labour and for a few hours a/g286  erwards. A team of two or three women with experience in a/g308  ending at 
labour would be helpful.
What does a birth preparedness plan contain? (See Annexe-3 for format for individual plan)
When should a birth preparedness plan be readied? It should be ready as early as possible a/g286  er conﬁ 
rming the pregnancy, and 
in consultation with the family (husband, mother-in-law, or other decision 
makers). You should review the plan in the third trimester (a/g286  er seventh 
month) with the family and the ANM. At this time, the choice of institution and the transport should be ﬁ  nalised. 27 Maternal HealthPart BDecisions People Make
 Where should I go 
for a safe delivery?
Birth Micro Plan of ASHA/ANM/AWW
I help every family with a pregnant 
woman to make a birth plan. If she has any danger signs or complications, I will ask her to go to the CHC or DH when her delivery is due.I must also make arrangements to ensure that the transport is ready and available at that time. 
But if she and her family do not want to go that far and the 24X7 PHC is crowded, I will advise her to go to the nearby sub-centre where two ANMs are trained to conduct deliveries and one of them is always there.
For some women, family circumstances and beliefs 
make even going to the sub-centre diffi  cult. I will then get the ANM to come to her house, and will assist in the preparations needed, after counselling that a safe delivery in this situation may not always be possible. 
If I go to the PHC which is open 24 hours, I will be cared for and can rest for two days. Also, if there is any surgery needed, they can rush me to the big hospital quickly.
Woman’s choice
I will also need to ensure that I have an escort, maybe the ASHA, to accompany me, and that someone is taking care of the children and things at home. If danger signs or complications develop before the delivery, I will need to go to the big hospital straight away, but I hope that does not happen.
If she has no complications, I will counsel her to go to the 24X7 PHC, and for this too, I must ensure that transport arrangements are made in time.ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
283. Management of Anaemia
In India, anaemia among women is very common. The chances of a mother 
having a delivery before term, or even dying are higher among mothers with severe anaemia. In order to make sure that all women have good iron stores, all pregnant women should be given iron tablets, even if they are not anaemic. Anaemia can be detected by a simple blood test, which measures the amount of a pigment called Haemoglobin (Hb). Low levels of Hb mean that the woman has anaemia (see box below). The test should be performed during the antenatal check-up. This can be done at the VHND by the ANM. 
Haemoglobin level Degree of anaemia
More than 11 g/dl Absence of anaemia/Normal
7-11 g/dl Moderate anaemia
Less than 7 g/dl Severe anaemia
If a woman during the time of pregnancy has Hb level below 11g/dl, she is considered to be suﬀ  ering from anaemia. 
Common symptoms of severe anaemia include:• Very pale tongue• Weakness• General swelling in body. 
For women who do not have anaemia (Hb more than 11 g/dl)
The pregnant woman should take one tablet of IFA every day for at least 100 
days (prophylactic dose), starting a/g286  er the ﬁ  rst trimester, at least 14-16 weeks 
of gestation to prevent anaemia. This dosage regimen is to be repeated again for three months a/g286  er the delivery.
If a woman is found to be anaemic:
• The woman should be given two IFA tablets per day for three months. 
This means that a pregnant w oman with anaemia needs to take at least 
200 tablets of IF
A. Besides taking IFA tablets, you should encourage the 
pregnant woman, where possible, to increase her dietary intake of iron-rich food.
• The Hb level should be estimated again a/g286  er one month. If the level 
increases, you should tell the woman to continue with two tablets of IFA daily until the Hb comes to normal. If the Hb does not rise in spite of taking IFA tablets, in the prescribed dose, you should refer the woman to the nearest facility that is equipped to manage complications in pregnancy.
• You should refer women with severe anaemia immediately to the nearest 
PHC/CHC/DH for further treatment. Such women may need injections or blood transfusions. 
29 Maternal HealthPart B• The dosage regimen of two IFA tablets per 
day should be repeated for three months 
post-partum also. 
Counselling pregnant women on anaemia:
•  Encourage women to take iron-rich foods 
such as green leafy vegetables, whole 
pulses, ragi, jaggery, meat and liver. This advice should be discussed with family and ﬁ  nalised based on the family situation. 
•  Encourage the woman, where possible, 
to take plenty of fruits and vegetables containing vitamin C (such as mango, guava, orange and sweet lime) as these enhance the absorption of iron.
•  Counsel the women on the necessity of taking IFA, the dangers associated 
with anaemia, and inform the women that these side-eﬀ  ects are common and not serious, and will reduce over time.
•  IFA tablets must be taken regularly, preferably early in the morning on an 
empty stomach. If the woman has nausea and pain in abdomen, she may take the tablets a/g286  er meals or at night. This will avoid nausea.
• Dispel the myths and misconceptions related to IFA and convince the 
woman about the importance of taking it. An example of a common myth is that the consumption of IFA may aﬀ  ect baby’s complexion.
• Many women do not take IFA tablets regularly due to some common 
side-eﬀ  ects such as nausea, constipation and black stools. Tell women not to worry about passing black stool while consuming IFA. It is normal. 
• In case of constipation, the woman should drink more water and add 
roughage (plenty of green leafy vegetables) to her diet.
• IFA tablets should not be consumed with tea, coﬀ  ee, milk or calcium tablet 
as it reduces the absorption of iron.
• IFA tablets may make the woman feel less tired than before. However, 
despite feeling be/g308  er, she should not stop taking the tablets and must complete the course as advised by the healthcare provider.
• Ask the woman to return to you if she has problem taking IFA tablets. 
How do you get the IFA?The IFA tablets are part of your drug kit. Try to ensure that you always have 
enough stock. Either your facilitator or a person appointed by the MO of the PHC is given the responsibility of reﬁ  lls for the drug kit. IFA tablets are also made available at VHND or in any health facility.
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
304. Identifying complications during Pregnancy and Delivery
Danger signs can occur at any time during pregnancy or delivery. You should 
be alert to these signs. A woman who experiences any one of these signs may be in serious danger and you should immediately facilitate referral to a health facility. You should also educate family members on how to recognise these complications and be prepared for immediate referral.
Health problems during pregnancy that need immediate referral 
Danger signs in women How to recognise
 Bleeding from vagina Bleeding - any amount 
(bright red bleeding or clots or tissue)
Loss of foetal movement Absence of movement/kicking or severe abdominal pain
Headache/dizziness/blurred vision Severe headache and blurred vision or severe headache and spots before the eyes
31 Maternal HealthPart BSwollen face/hands Pitting oedema over back palm
Convulsions/fits Eyes roll, face and limbs 
twitch, body gets stiff and shakes, fists clinched
Non-Emergency referral during pregnancy 
Problem How to recognise Action to be 
taken
Severe anaemia Tongue very pale, weakness, general swelling in bodyRefer to PHC/Dist. Hospital
Night Blindness Pregnant women find it difficult to see at duskRefer to ANM or PHC
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
32Fever Skin warm to 
touch 
Temp > 100 
degree F (37.8 degree Celsius)Give paracetamol tablet. If no relief after 48 hours, refer to PHC. 
Pain/burning when urinating Frequent urination and urgency. Or pain/burning when passing urineLet mother drink plenty of water. If no relief after 24 hours, refer to PHC.
White Discharge Passage of white discharge per vagina, itching in private partsTeach mother to use gentian violet; apply high in her vagina daily. If no relief after 5 days, refer to PHC/Hospital.
Non-Emergency referral during pregnancy 
Problem How to recognise Action to be taken
Itching/Scabies/boil on skin with pus Skin rashes with itching 
could be present in other 
family members as well
Scabies Presence of pus filled 
boilsFor boils, advice women to apply hot fomentations to the area thrice daily. If no improvement after 2 days, refer to PHC. For scabies, refer to ANM/PHC.
Bad obstetric history Always ask the pregnant 
woman about past history of abortion, still birth, or neonatal death, or whether she developed complications in last pregnancy especially one which required surgery.Refer to CHC/DH33 Maternal HealthPart BMultiple pregnancies Suspicion/Knowledge: 
usually suspected by 
ANM or by doctor after abdominal examination.Refer to CHC/DH. Ultrasound examination would confirm this.
Malpresentation Suspicion/Knowledge: 
Diagnosed by ANM or doctor after abdominal examination.Refer to CHC/DH. Ultrasound examination would confirm this.
Danger signs in labour and delivery
These danger signs can occur at any time:
• Bleeding (fresh blood)
• Swollen face and hands 
• Baby lying sideways
• Water breaks but labour does not start within 24 hours or less 
• Colour of water - green or brown 
• Prolonged labour - woman pushing for more than 12 hours (eight hours in the 
case of women who have already had children) with the baby not coming out
• Fever
• Fits 
• Retained placenta
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
34Objectives of the Session
By the end of this session, the ASHA will learn about: • A/g308  end and observe delivery and record various events.
• Record the time of birth in Hours, Minutes and Seconds, using a digital 
wrist watch.
• Record pregnancy outcomes as abortion, live birth, still birth or 
newborn death.
Notice that the mouth of the 
uterus is tightly closed. Head of the baby is towards mouth of uterus and baby’s umbilical cord is attached to placenta which is attached to uterus.
(a) (b)Pregnancy and the Birth Processes
Pregnant Woman Full-TermKey tasks to be undertaken:
• Know what are the important tasks in taking care of the newborn.
• Be able to carry out these tasks if required.• Ensure that SBA does not apply fundal pressure or gives injections to 
speed up labour. 
• Put baby to breast as soon as possible a/g286  er birth (provided mother is 
comfortable).
• If the delivery is taking place at home, in case of complications, mother 
and baby should be referred to the nearest health facility. 5. Care during Delivery
Observation of the delivery process was 
not part of previous ASHA training modules. In this module, you will be oriented to normal delivery processes and newborn care, and also develop the skills for recording the various events and pregnancy outcome. Even though you are not required to manage delivery, you may have to help if the delivery starts during transport. This knowledge also gives you conﬁ dence to know more about this. 
You should try and stay with the pregnant woman through delivery in the institution or at home, and post-partum period. You could therefore also be a ‘Birth Companion’ to the mother during the stay at the institution. This is not a compulsion, but a desirable service. Alternatively, a close relative could also be the birth companion.35 Maternal HealthPart BBefore Delivery
The delivery room should be 
cleaned before the delivery. If the delivery is happening at home, you should facilitate a clean delivery space. 
Immediately after birth, if the 
baby remains naked, it may become cold. Hence, baby clothes should be kept ready before delivery. 
1st Stage of labour
Starts from the beginning of pain until the mouth of the womb is fully open. This happens inside and cannot be seen. The bag of water also breaks at the end of this stage. The fluid is usually clear but may be yellow or green or red. If green, it indicates infection.
This first stage of labour usually lasts about 8 to 12 hours in the first pregnancy. 
May take much less time in subsequent pregnancies.
Illustration (a) - drawing of side view of a pregnant woman.
In illustration (b) - the mouth of the womb is almost closed, and thick.In illustration (c) - the mouth is thinner and is opening little.In (d) - the mouth of the womb is fully open. When the womb is completely 
open, it is the end of the first stage of labour. At this time, the water bag usually breaks. This first stage of labour usually lasts about 8 to 12 hours. It takes longer if the woman is having her first baby. (a) (b) (c) (d)
Safe Delivery
Three Stages of LabourASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
36The Process of Delivery
In this process, ASHA can see on the outside when the baby starts to move 
through the vagina in the process of being born. During each contraction, a li/g308  le more of the head is seen (a, b, c).2nd Stage of labour
Contractions push the baby out of the womb: the delivery of the baby.
This second stage of labour usually lasts about one hour. 
During the second stage of labour, the baby moves down the birth canal until the 
baby’s head is showing at the opening of the vagina. After the head is delivered, the shoulders come out and then the rest of the body.  (a) (b) (c)
3rd Stage of labour
The contractions cause the placenta to separate out from the uterus and be pushed out. delivery of the placenta. 
The third stage of labour usually takes only a few minutes. if 
it takes above 20 to 30 minutes there is  cause for concern.
(a) (b)(c)
(d) (e) (f)d
37 Maternal HealthPart BThe placenta usually comes out a/g286  er 15-20 minutes. 
Points for you to pay attention to if you are also present at the time of delivery in 
the institution:
• It is not necessary to shave the area, or give an enema to the mother at the 
time of delivery.
• All deliveries do not require an episiotomy (cut at the perineal site).
• Fundal pressure (pushing on the abdomen) should not be applied.
• You should be alert if injections are being given to hasten the delivery 
process. Such injections can cause a baby who is still born, birth of a baby who is unable to breathe, or even cause the death of the newborn. However, the same injections are advisable after the baby has been born in order to control bleeding after delivery. Only the ANM or doctor should give the injection. 
• When the mother and baby stay in the hospital and if you are staying with 
them as a birth companion, she should ensure that the mother and baby are seen by the MO and nurse at least twice a day and whenever required if there are problems. The very top of the head comes ﬁ  rst, then the eyes, nose and mouth (d). While 
in most babies, the eyes are facing the ﬂ  oor; sometimes they are born looking 
towards the ceiling. When the baby’s head is out, it turns to one side (e) and the shoulders and rest of the body are delivered (f). Once out, the baby will cry. 
Delivery of Placenta 
The cord will be connected to the placenta which is still inside the womb.ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
386. Post-Partum Care 
Post-partum care is the period a/g286  er delivery of the placenta up to six weeks 
a/g286 er birth.3 
 3  Post-partum care has been covered in ASHA Module 2.Tasks for you to undertake during this period
• Conducting home visits to mother and child: Mothers and newborns 
need care from the time of birth to six weeks a/g286  er the delivery. The recommendation for postnatal care is to visit on the 3rd day a/g286  er delivery, on the 7th day and at the end of six weeks, i.e on the 42nd day. For the newborn, the recommendation is to visit on the 3rd day, 7th day, 14th day, 21st day and 28th day. A/g286  er this period, visits are still needed once in two weeks till the child is two years old for nutrition advice, immunisation advice, and support for breastfeeding and complementary feeding, for illness prevention and just to remain in touch. 
• In eﬀ  ect therefore, you would need to visit on the 3rd, 7th, 14th day, 
21st, and 28th day, and a/g286  er that, once every two weeks starting from the 42nd day, till the child is two years old. If the child is born at home, then of course you should be there at birth or at least visit her within the ﬁ  rst hour. 
• Advice to the mother during these visits: 
/rhombus6 Assess the mother for signs of complications (see below for the 
list of complications) and ensure appropriate referral.
/rhombus6 Encourage her to rest for at least six weeks a/g286  er childbirth. 
Families should be counselled to allow this. 
/rhombus6 Encourage her to eat more food than usual. She can eat any kind 
of food but high protein foods – pulses and legumes (nuts are especially useful), foods of animal source. She should also drink plenty of ﬂ  uids. 
Objectives of the session
By the end of this session, the ASHA will learn about: 
• Schedule of visits and tasks to be performed at each visit.• Understand the possible complications of the post-partum period.• Be able to identify the complications and refer appropriately.39 Maternal HealthPart B/rhombus6 Encourage and support for exclusive breastfeeding (Please see section 
on Breastfeeding-Part C, Section 3)
/rhombus6 Discuss with the mother the need for contraceptive services. 
Caution her on the risk of unprotected sex and the high 
chances of conceiving again. You should counsel her on the importance of spacing the next child birth for her own health and that of the baby. You should help her in making the choice of the method of family planning, whether spacing or limiting. 
Complications during the post-partum period
Some women can develop complications a/g286  er 
the childbirth. The symptoms of these major complications are:
1. Excessive bleeding: Ask the mother if the 
bleeding is heavy. O/g286  en this is quite obvious, 
but sometimes it may be diﬃ   cult to judge. 
If the woman is using more than ﬁ  ve pads 
a day or more than one thick cloth in a day, she is having heavy bleeding. You should immediately refer her to an institution which manages complications. You should also ask the mother to begin breastfeeding immediately, that should help reduce the bleeding. Referral is most urgent. Even the delay of a few minutes can make a diﬀ  erence. 
2. Puerperal Sepsis (Infections): Ask if the discharge is foul smelling. If the 
answer is yes, then suspect infection. Fever, chills and pain in abdomen along with the foul smell make infections even more likely. You should measure temperature to conﬁ  rm fever. Referral is required since the mother needs antibiotics. Referral on the same day is advisable. 
3. Convulsions with or without swelling of face and hands, severe 
headache, and blurred vision:  Such patients need immediate referral. If 
ANM is available within 15 minutes, she can stabilise the patient before referral.
4. Anaemia: You should check if the mother is pale and enable the mother to 
get her blood Hb status checked (for management of anaemia in the post-partum period, please see Section 3).
5. Breast engorgement and Infection:  (Part C: Newborn Health)
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
406. Perineal Swelling and Infection: If the mother has 
a small tear at the opening of her vagina (or has had 
stitches during the delivery), she should keep the area clean. She can apply cloth dipped in hot water, twice a day and hold it to her genitals. This will give her relief and help the healing. If there is fever, she should be referred to the PHC or CHC. A tablet of paracetomol would help both the pain and the fever. 
7. Post-Partum Mood Changes: Some women may 
suﬀ er from mood changes a/g286  er delivery. They need 
counselling and family support. The changes usually disappear a/g286  er a week or so. If the changes become severe then referral is required. 
Part C
Newborn Health 41PART C
Newborn
HealthPart C
Newborn Health
 43Newborn Health
PART C
Objectives of the session
By the end of this session, the ASHA will learn about: • Observe and assist during the immediate newborn period in case she is 
present at the time of delivery.
• Observe the baby during the ﬁ  rst hour, during the ﬁ  rst two days and 
during the ﬁ  rst month to take care of the newborn, support and help 
the mother to breastfeed, and to keep the baby warm.
• Know what her speciﬁ  c role is during the home visits, and learn how to 
care for the newborn. 
1. Care of the Baby at the time of Delivery
Many babies die immediately after birth due to 
asphyxia. In case of home delivery, when mild labour pains start, you can manage asphyxiated babies by removing mucus and can initiate respiration with the help of the instruments you have.
You should encourage the mother to start breastfeeding immediately after the delivery, as this will help in quick delivery of placenta and minimises bleeding. Starting to breastfeed immediately after the birth makes the baby stronger.
Chances of the baby’s death and 
getting sick are higher among the babies born before time (pre-term) and in LBW babies, (Weight less than 2500 gm increases the risk and below 1800 gm, the risk is considered very high.)
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
442. Schedule of Home Visits for the care of the Newborn
The purpose of these visits is to ensure that the newborn is being kept warm 
and breastfed exclusively. Encourage the mother to breastfeed, discourage harmful practices such as bo/g308  le feeds, early baths, giving other substances by mouth, and to identify early signs of sepsis or other illnesses in the newborn. 
• The newborn requires a visit immediately a/g286  er birth (or within the ﬁ  rst 
24 hours), and on Day 2, if the baby is born at home. 
• If the baby is born at a facility, persuade and support the mother to stay 
for at least 48 hours, and therefore, the ﬁ  rst two visits are taken care of 
in the institution. However, if you are there with the mother, as a birth companion, then you could be of assistance to the nurse/ANM there.
• If the baby is born in a health facility, or at home, you should visit the 
baby on Days 3, 7, 14, 21 and 28. Additional visits are needed for newborn babies which are LBW, born before term and are sick. 
3. Examining the Newborn at Birth
Steps for you to take “just after” the baby is born 
if the baby is born at home, or if you are present at the delivery,
1. Ask the mother about/observe the ﬂ  uid a/g286  er the waters break.
2. If the ﬂ  uid is yellow/green, as soon as the head is seen (even 
before delivery of complete baby), clean the mouth of the baby 
with gauze piece.
3. As soon as the baby is born, note the time of birth and start 
counting time.
4. Observation of baby at birth or within the ﬁ  rst 30 seconds and 
at 5 minutes a/g286  er birth for movement of limbs, breathing and crying. The ﬁ  gure below will enable the assessment of whether 
the newborn should be recorded as a live or still birth. All six have to be “No” to declare a still birth. Even if one is “yes” the baby should be declared as live birth. 
5. If there is no cry or a weak cry, if there is no breathing or weak 
breathing or gasping, this condition is called Asphyxia. If the baby is asphyxiated (does not breathe at birth), and there is no doctor or nurse, you should try to help and this skill is taught to you, in Module 7. However, in many such newborns, your eﬀ  orts may not make enough diﬀ  erence and you should not feel bad or blame yourself for this. (Management of asphyxia will be taught in Module 7).Part C
Newborn Health
 45Stillbirth Decision Tree Examination at 30 seconds
Examination at 5 minutesCry Limb Movement Breathing
Cry Limb Movement Breathing
Still Birthno no no
no no no
Examination at 30 seconds
Examination at 5 minutesCry Limb Movement Breathing
Cry Limb Movement Breathing
Live Birthyes yes yes
no no no
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
466. Provide normal care at birth. 
 /rhombus6   Dry the baby: Immediately a/g286  er delivery, the newborn should be 
cleaned with a so/g286   moist cloth and then the body and the head wiped 
dry with a so/g286   dry cloth. The so/g286   white substance with which the newborn is covered is actually protective and should not be rubbed oﬀ  .
 
/rhombus6  The baby should be kept close to mother’s chest and abdomen. 
 /rhombus6  The baby should be wrapped in several layers of clothing/woollen 
clothing depending upon the season.
 /rhombus6  The room should be warm enough for an adult to feel just 
uncomfortable. The room should be free from strong wind.
8. You should weigh the newborn and decide whether the baby is normal or 
LBW. 
9. Determine whether the baby is term or pre-term.
10. Measure newborn temperature.
First examination of newborn
a. You should conduct the first examination within first 24 hours of delivery 
and look for the following:• Whether the baby has any abnormality such as curved limbs, jaundice, 
bump on head, cle/g286   lip.
• 
How the baby is suckling at the breast. 
Part C
Newborn Health
 47• Whether the baby has loose limbs. 
• Listen to the cry of the baby. • Provide care of eyes. If there is pus/purulent discharge from 
eyes and no doctor or nurse available, apply tetracycline 
ointment. Even for normal eyes, tetracycline is used as a preventive, so even in doubt as to whether it is pus, it could be given. 
• Keep umbilical cord dry and clean. 
b. General precautions the family must take
The newborn is delicate and can easily fall sick if the family and mother are not careful. Y ou should explain some general 
precautions that the family should take. 
• 
Bathing the baby: Although it is recommended that the baby should not 
be bathed until the ﬁ  rst seven days, many families would like to bathe the 
baby on the ﬁ  rst or second day. For a normal baby, if the family insists, the 
baby could be bathed a/g286  er the second day. But in the case of LBW baby, you 
must insist on their waiting for at least seven days. You should explain that 
bathing the baby and leaving it wet or exposed may cause it to get cold and fall sick. Thus, it is be/g308  er to wipe the baby with a warm wet cloth and dry 
the baby immediately.
• Keep the baby away from people who are sick.
• People who are sick with cold, cough, fever, skin infection, diarrhoea, etc. 
should not hold the baby or come in close contact with the baby.
• The newborn baby should not be taken to places where there are other 
sick children.
• The newborn baby should also not be taken to places where there are 
large gatherings of people.
c. What are you expected to do during the newborn visits?
• Enquire and ﬁ  ll the mother
 ’s information on home visit form. (Annexe 6)
• Enquire and ﬁ  ll newborn information on home visit form. These forms 
help you to think about all the steps you need to take. (Annexe 7)
• Take out the necessary equipment from the bag and keep on a clean cloth.
• Wash your hands well as taught.• Then examine the baby – a. measure temperature, b. weigh the baby, and 
c. perform other activities in the sequence provided in the newborn home 
visit form. (Annexe 8 & 9)
• Provide the care of eyes, skin and cord.
• Check that the home visit form is ﬁ  lled in completely. 
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
48d. Learning proper hand washing
You must make sure that your hands are washed properly with soap before touching the baby . Y 
ou should also teach the mother and family members to 
wash their hands before touching the baby.
(Please see Annexe 7 for skills checklist for hand washing)
e. Learning how to measuring temperature 
You should measure the temperature of the newborn using a special thermometer to see if the body temperature is normal or if baby has hypothermia (colder than normal). 
(Please see Annexe 8 for skills checklist for measuring temperature)
f. Learn how to weigh the new born
• Baby should be weighed within two days of birth.
• It is important to w
eigh the baby a/g286  er birth because babies may require 
special care on the basis of the birth weight.
• It is be/g308  er to use a special colour-coded weighing machine meant just for 
weighing newborn which records the weight as green, yellow or red. 
(Please see Annexe 7,8 & 9 for skills checklist)
/rhombus6 If the baby’s weight is “in the green zone: baby’s weight is normal and can 
be managed with normal care as described above.
/rhombus6 If in the yellow zone, the baby is mildly under weight, but can be managed 
at home with extra care as given below. (below 2.5 kg but above 1.8 kg).
/rhombus6 If in the red coloured zone, this means that the baby is very small and 
must be referred to the health centre. These babies also need extra care 
as given below. (less than 1.8 kg)
g. Learn how to take care of babies less than 2.5 kg
Babies whose weight is in the yellow or red zone are small and require extra care as follows:• Provide extra w
armth.
• Family should ensure.
 /rhombus6 Baby is wrapped well with thin sheets and blankets.
 /rhombus6 The head is covered to prevent heat loss.
 /rhombus6 The baby is kept very close to the mother’s abdomen and chest.
 /rhombus6  Warm water ﬁ  lled bo/g308  les wrapped in cloth may be kept on either side 
of the baby’s blankets, when not being kept close to the mother’s body.
 /rhombus6 The baby must be fed more frequently. Part C
Newborn Health
 49All babies below 1.8 kg must be taken to a 24x7 facility or other facility known 
to provide referral care for sick newborn and examined by a doctor or nurse.
h. Umbilical cord care
• Cord should be kept clamped, till it dries and falls oﬀ  .  
• 
No application of any medicine is required if there is no bleeding or 
discharge.
• The umbilical cord should be kept clean and dry at all times.
i. Eye care
Skill checklist for applying eye ointment 
If a newborn has pus discharging from its ey es y
ou can put antibiotic 
ointment in the baby’s eyes or a capsule which is available in the market. How to put antibiotic ointment:• Gently pull the baby’s lower eyelid down.• Squeeze a thin line of ointment moving from the inside corner to the 
outside of the eye.
• Do not touch the baby’s eye with the tip of the tube. If the tube touches the 
babies eyes, it shouldn’t be used again.
• If the eyes are swollen with pus, then put the ointment two times a day for 
5 days.
Remember: The usual bathroom scales cannot reliably record small 
diﬀ  erences in weights. That is why bathroom scales cannot accurately record newborn weight and it is not advisable to use these for weighing newborns.ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
504. Breastfeeding
a. Benefits for the baby
• Early skin-to-skin contact keeps the baby warm.
• It helps in early secretion of breast milk.• Feeding ﬁ  rst milk (colostrum) protects the baby from diseases.
• Helps mother and baby to develop a close and loving relationship.
b. Benefits for the mother
• Helps womb to contract and the placenta is expelled easily.• Reduce the risk of excessive bleeding a/g286  er delivery.
c. Important facts about breastfeeding
• Start breastfeeding immediately or at least within one hour a/g286  er birth. 
Give nothing else, not even water.
• Baby should be put to the mother’s breast even before placenta is 
delivered. It is useful for both the baby as well as the mother.
• Breastfeed as o/g286  en as the baby wants and for as long as the baby wants. 
Baby should be breastfed day and night at least 8-10 times in 24 hours.
• Feeding more o/g286  en helps in production of more milk. The more the baby 
sucks, more milk is produced.
• Baby should not be given any other liquid or foods such as sugar water, 
honey, ghu/g308  i, goat’s/cow’s milk and not even water.Objectives of the session By the end of this session, the ASHA will learn about: • Counsel mother for breastfeeding.
• Provide breastfeeding support. • Emphasise importance of early and exclusive breastfeeding.• Help mother to express milk and feed babies who cannot suckle at 
birth.
• Manage breastfeeding problems (engorgement, cracked nipple, 
mother feels she does not have enough milk).
Part C
Newborn Health
 51d. Breastfeeding observation tips
Signs of breastfeeding going well Signs of possible difficulty 
Mother’s body relaxed, comfortable, confident, eye 
contact with baby, touchingMother tense, leans over baby. Not much eye contact or touching
Baby’s mouth well attached, covering most of the areola, opened wide, lower lip turned outwardsMouth not opened wide, not covering areola
Lips around nipple 
Suckling well, deep sucks, bursts with pausesCheeks round, swallowing heard or seenRapid sucks, cheeks tense or sucked in Smacking or 
clicking sounds
Baby calm and alert at breast, stays attached, Mother may feel uterus cramping, some milk may be leaking (showing that milk is flowing)Baby restless or crying, slips off breast; Mother not feeling cramping, no milk is leaking (showing that milk is not flowing)
After feed, breast soft, nipples protruding After feed, breast full or enlarged, nipples may be red, 
cracked, flat or inverted
e. Correct position for breastfeeding
To obtain maximum beneﬁ  t of breastfeeding, the baby should be held in the 
correct position and be put correctly to the breast. The baby is in the correct position when:
• While holding the baby, the mother also supports the baby’s bo/g308  om, and 
not just the head or shoulders.
• Mother holds the baby close to her body.• The baby’s face is facing the breast, with nose opposite the nipple
Breastfeeding Positions
Cradle Position Side-lying Position
Underarm Position Alternate Underarm Position
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
52f. Counselling tips
• You are there to help the mother, not to take over.
• Use verbal and non-verbal skills to make her feel at 
ease.
• Encourage and praise her; every mother has the 
ability to breastfeed. O/g286  en mothers are worried that 
they are inexperienced and lack the conﬁ  dence. Many 
women do not breastfeed successfully because they 
do not get good advice, support and encouragement.
• If she says something that you do not agree with, do not say ‘that is 
wrong’. Do not make her feel bad or stupid. You can repeat what she says (For example, ‘I hear you saying that you think you don’t have enough milk....’ Ask her why she thinks so. Listen to what she is saying and why). 
• A/g286  er you assess the breastfeeding, you should check the baby’s weight 
gain. 
• Give advice in simple and clear language.
• Make sure the mother understands what you are saying.• Have her repeat what she will try to do. 
g. Why only breastfeeding? 
Giving other food or ﬂ  uid may harm the baby in following ways• It reduces the amount of breast milk taken by the baby.• It may contain germs from water or on feeding bo/g308  les or utensils. These 
germs can cause diarrhoea.
• It may be too dilute, so the baby becomes malnourished.• Baby does not get enough iron from cow’s and goat’s milk and may thus 
develop anaemia.
• Baby may develop allergies.• Baby may have diﬃ   culty digesting animal milk; the milk can cause 
diarrhoea, rashes or other symptoms. Diarrhoea may become persistent. 
• Breast milk provides all the water a baby needs. Babies do not need extra 
water even during the summer months.
Part C
Newborn Health
 53Managing Common Breastfeeding Problems
Sore nipples
 Causes: poor latch-on or positioning at breast
Management
• Improve attachment and/or position.
• Continue breastfeeding (reduce engorgement if present).
• Build mother’s confidence.
• Advise her to wash breast once a day; not to use soap for this.
•  Put a little breast milk on nipples after feeding is finished (to lubricate the nipple) and air-dry.
• Wear loose clothing.
•  If nipples are very red, shiny, flaky, itchy, and their condition does not get better with above treatment, it 
may be fungus infection. Apply gentian violet paint to nipples after each breastfeed for five days. If the 
condition does not improve, refer to a doctor.
Inverted nipples
Sometimes the nipple will retract in to the breast, and can be checked even during pregnancy. The best treatment is to encourage the mother to gently pull out the nipple and roll it, several times in a day. 
Not enough milk
Causes: Delayed initiation of breastfeeding; infrequent feeding; giving fluids other than breast milk; mother’s anxiety, exhaustion, insecurity; inadequate family support.
Management
• Decide whether there is enough milk or not:
  /rhombus6  Does the baby pass urine six times or more each day?
  /rhombus6  Has the baby gained sufficient weight? (During the 1st week there is 
usually a small weight loss, after that a newborn should gain 150-
200 gm per week.)
  /rhombus6  Is the baby satisfied after feeds?
• Re-assure mother.
• If there is not enough milk, have the baby feed more often.
• Check breastfeed to observe mother attachment and positioning of the 
mother and baby.
• Encourage rest. Emphasise the mother to drink and eat more.
• Praise her and return for follow-up. 
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
54Engorged and painful breasts (very full breasts)
Causes: Delayed initiation of breastfeeding, poor attachment, incomplete 
emptying of breasts, restricting the length of the feeds.
Management
• Prevent by:
  /rhombus6 Starting breastfeeding soon after delivery and
                feeding often..
  /rhombus6 Ensuring correct attachment.
  /rhombus6 Encouraging on-demand feeding.
• If baby is able to suckle, feed more frequently, help with positioning.
•  If the baby is not able to attach, apply warm compresses to breast, 
gently massage from outside toward the nipple and express some milk until the areola is soft, then put baby to the breast, making sure that the attachment is correct.
•  Have baby feed often to empty out the breasts. If it is not possible, ask 
the mother to express some milk herself.
•  If breasts are red and hard, continue to feed often. Use warm 
compresses and gently massage breasts towards nipple. Take mother’s temperature. If she has fever, mother should visit the doctor. She should continue to breastfeed (from both sides) even if she is taking antibiotics. 
Expressing milk by hand
1. Wash hands with soap and water.
2. Place a warm compress on the breast for a few minutes if desired.3. Gently massage the breast starting from the chest moving toward the 
nipple; do this in a circle (near the underarm, and then to the bo/g308  om of 
the breast etc.), so that all parts of the breast are massaged.
4. Lean forward and support the bo/g308  om of the breast with one hand.5. Hold the areola between thumb and two ﬁ  ngers of other hand. Put her 
hand on the areola above the nipple and the two ﬁ  ngers on the areola 
below the nipple.
6. Press toward the chest (about 1-2 cm) and then squeeze the milk 
reservoirs beneath the areola (do not squeeze the nipple).
7. Press and release the thumb and ﬁ  rst ﬁ  nger several times until the milk 
drips out. Use a clean bo/g308  le or a cup to collect the milk. Milk may drip at the beginning and then spray out a/g286  er it starts ﬂ  owing.
8. Rotate the thumbs and ﬁ  nger around the areola so that the milk is 
removed from all the reservoirs.
9. Repeat with the other breast.
Part C
Newborn Health
 55Expressing milk
Feeding baby with 
traditional spoon like utensil used for milk feeding
Signs that the baby is not getting enough milk
• Poor weight gain
/rhombus6  Weight gain of less than 500 gm in a month 
/rhombus6  Less than birth weight after two weeks 
• Passing small amounts of concentrated urine
/rhombus6  Less than six times a day
/rhombus6 Yellow and strong smelling
• Other signs are:
/rhombus6 Baby not satisfied after breastfeed and often cries
/rhombus6 Very frequent breastfeeds
/rhombus6 Very long breastfeeds
/rhombus6 Baby refuses to breastfeed
/rhombus6 Baby has hard, dry or green stools
/rhombus6 No milk comes when mother tries to express
/rhombus6 Breast did not enlarge 
/rhombus6 Milk did not come in.ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
56Mothers and families think that in the following situations, their milk is not 
enough, but in fact, these do not affect the breast milk supply:
• Age of mother
• Sexual intercourse
• Return of menstruation
• Disapproval of relatives and neighbours
• Age of baby
• Caesarean Section
• Many children
• Simple, ordinary diet
Part C
Newborn Health
 57Keeping newborn warm and the problem of hypothermia 
Why is it important to keep baby warm after delivery?
Babies have diﬃ   culty maintaining their temperature at 
birth and in the ﬁ  rst day of life.They come out wet, and 
lose heat quickly. If they get cold, they use up energy, and can become sick. LBW and pre-term babies are at greater risk of ge/g308  ing cold.
When and why do most newborns get cold?Most newborns lose heat in ﬁ  rst minute a/g286  er 
 delivery. 
They are born wet. If they are le/g286   wet and naked, they lose a lot of heat to the air. A newborn baby’s skin is very thin and its head is big in size compared to its body. It loses heat very quickly from its head. Babies do not have the capacity to keep themselves warm. If the newborn baby is not properly dried, wrapped, and its head is not kept covered, it can lose 2 to 4 degree Celsius within 10-20 minutes.
Example: If the baby’s temperature was 97.7 degree Fahrenheit (36.5 degree 
Celsius) (normal temperature) at the time of birth and if there was a loss of 2.7 degree Fahrenheit because the baby was not properly dried and covered, the body temperature will become 95 degree Fahrenheit (35.0 degree Celsius), which is below normal. 
What is the term for a situation when a baby’s temperature falls below 
normal?When a baby has a temperature below normal, it suﬀ  ers from hypothermia.
  
What happens to a baby with hypothermia?A baby who is cold, and has a low temperature (hypothermia) suﬀ  ers from:
• 
Decreased ability to suckle at the breast, leading to poor feeding and 
weakness.5. Keeping the Newborn Warm
Objectives of the session
By the end of this session, the ASHA will learn about: • Identify the newborn whose body temperature is less than 
normal and whose body temperature is more than normal. 
• Teach mothers how to keep the newborns warm.
• Teach mothers how to re-warm cold babies.• Teach mothers how to control newborn temperature in hot 
weather.
• Learn to take the temperature.
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
58• Increased susceptibility to infections.
• Increased risk of death, especially in LBW and pre-term babies.
How can you tell if a baby is hypothermic?
• The early sign is cold feet.
• Then, the body becomes cold.
• 
The best method is to measure the baby’s body temperature.
(This skill has already been taught to you)
How to keep newborns warm
• Before delivery, warm up the room (warm enough for adults).• Immediately a/g286  er delivery, dry the baby. 
• Put a cap on the baby since a lot of heat could be lost though its head.• Place in skin-to-skin contact with mother.• Cover or put clothes on the baby, wrap it up with clean cloth, and place it 
close to its mother.
• Initiate early breastfeeding.• Bathing for newborns:  
/rhombus6  It is best to wait until the  second day to bathe the baby. One should 
wait seven days in case of LBW baby. 
  /rhombus6  If the family insists on bathing the ﬁ  rst day, please ask them to delay 
for at least six hours to give the baby time to adjust with its new 
environment.
  /rhombus6  For small and pre-term babies, do not give a bath until the baby 
gains weight (this could be few weeks) and weight of baby become 2,000 gm.
• To keep a small baby clean, you can give a light oil massage but making 
sure that the room is warm and the baby is not le/g286   uncovered for more than 10 minutes. DO NOT pour oil into any oriﬁ  ce, like the nose or ears at any time.
• Keep baby loosely clothed and wrapped.
• If it is very warm outside, make sure the baby is not too heavily clothed 
and wrapped; the baby can also get too hot. 
• Wherever possible, insist on referral to a facility that is managing sick 
newborns. If this is not immediately possible, begin the following steps:Warming
Part C
Newborn Health
 59How to re-warm a baby getting cold?
<97 degree Fahrenheit (36.1 degree Celsius) or too cold <95 degree Fahrenheit 
(35.0 degree Celsius) 
• Increase the room temperature.
• Remove any wet or cold blankets and clothes.
• Hold the baby with its skin next to its mother’s skin (skin-to-skin contact) and place a warmed cloth 
(not too hot to avoid burns) on its back or chest. As this cloth cools down, replace it with another 
warmed one, and repeat until the baby is warmer. Continue until the baby’s temperature reaches the normal range.
• Put on its clothes and its cap, put it in warm bag, and make it lie close to its mother.
• Continue to breastfeed the baby to provide calories and fluids to prevent a drop in the blood glucose level.
  /rhombus6 A common problem in hypothermic babies.
If a baby is too cold <95 degree Fahrenheit (35.0 degree Celsius), follow the above advice, and
• Place skin-to-skin, and once the baby is a little warmer, then clothe baby and place in a bed pre-
warmed with warm clothes, or a hot stone or hot water bottle. (Remove these articles before putting baby on the bed.)
• In an institutional delivery, there should be a newborn corner available with a radiant 
warmer, or some other suitable heating arrangement where the newborn baby can be kept.
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
606. Management of fever in newborn
A baby has fever if the temperature is above 99 degree Fahrenheit (37.2 
degree Celsius).  In the case of high body temperature of the baby during 
summer, verify in the following manner whether this is due to the body being overdressed or does it really have fever: 
• Unwrap the baby and take oﬀ   its cap.• Ventilate the room too to cool the baby. • Ask the mother to start breastfeeding. • If there is a source of extra heat (like a ﬁ  re) in the room, put it out.• Wait for 30 minutes and take the temperature once again. 
If the baby’s temperature returns to normal, explain to the mother that in very 
warm weather, the baby does not have to kept covered with additional cloth 
or kept wrapped.
If the temperature is still above normal a/g286  er the above measures have been 
taken, refer the baby for treatment.AnnexesAnnexes
 63Annexe 1: ASHA Drug Kit Stock Card
Month & Date of Refill (1) (2) (3) (N)
S.No. Name of 
DrugSymbol*  Balance Refill 
givenBalance Refill 
givenBalance Refill 
givenBalance Refill 
given
1
2
345‘n’
Balance: This is what was le/g286   in kit at the time of reﬁ  ll – a/g286  er recovering 
explained drugs/supplies.
Reﬁ ll: This is what was put into the kit.
*Symbol is a pictorial symbol that could be used to denote a drug, since o/g286  en, 
the drugs comes labelled only in English. Card is to be updated by person providing the reﬁ  ll.ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
64Annexe 2: Instructions for Pregnancy 
Test using Nischay Kit
The Nischay Kit contains the following:
1. A test card2. A disposable dropper3. A moisture absorption packet (not required for testing)
• Collect the morning urine in a clean and 
dry glass or in a plastic bottle.
• Take two drops of urine in the sample 
well.
• Wait for 5 minutes.
• If two violet colour lines come in the test 
region (T), the woman is pregnant.
• If she wants to continue with the 
pregnancy, advise her to undergo 
antenatal care.
• If she does not want to continue with the 
pregnancy this time, advise her for safe abortion.
• If the violet colour line in the test 
region (T) is one only, the woman is not pregnant.
• Tell her about family planning methods 
and help her in choosing the most appropriate one.
If there is no colour line in the test region (T), repeat the test next morning using a new Pregnancy Test Card.
Annexes
 65Annexe 3: Format for Individual Plans 
(Birth Preparedness)
Name:     Age:
Husband’s name:HH incomeLMPEDDPast pregnancy history (Include abortion, if any):
Order of 
pregnancyDate of delivery(Month and Year)Place of delivery:Home, SC, PHC, CHC, DH,Private Nursing HomeType of delivery:Natural, Forceps, C-SectionBirth Outcome:Live Birth, Stillborn, Age and Status of child currentlyAny other complications:Fever, Bleeding
First
SecondThird
• Any risk factors:
• Nearest SBA: Phone: 
• Nearest 24X7 PHC: Distance: Time: Cost
• Nearest Sub-Centre with a Skilled Birth A/g308  endant
• Nearest CHC with facilities to manage complications: Distance: 
Time: Cost
• Distance to District Hospital:
• How much is transport going to cost?
• Is the vehicle ﬁ  xed:       Owner:             Phone No.:
• Will we need extra money for the treatment ? How to organise it?
• Who will take care of the children when mother goes to the facility?
• Who will accompany her to the facility?
• Where will they stay?
• How will they ﬁ  nance their stay?
• Have they organised clothes and blankets for the baby?ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
66Annexe 4: Delivery Form (Fill in the form 
completely even in the case of a stillbirth) 
1) When did ASHA arrive at the hospital/woman’s home:    Date:
Time: Hrs_________Min________Early morning/ morning/afternoon/evening/night 2) When did woman’s mild labour pain starts?  DateTime: Hrs________Min_________Early morning/ morning/afternoon/evening/night Look for the following danger signs and if present, shift mother immediately to 
hospital
Danger sign
1) Delivery does not occur within 24 hrs of onset of mild 
labour Yes/No
2) Any part of the baby other than head comes out first Yes/No
3) Mother is having excessive bleeding Yes/No4) Placenta is not delivered within 30 mins after delivery Yes/No5) Mother is unconscious or is getting fits Yes/No
TBA/Neighbour or family member/Skilled Birth Attendant/Nurse/Doctor 
Name: __________________________________________________________4) Where was the delivery conducted?      Name of the village/town: _________________________________________                Home/Sub-Centre/PHC/CHC/ District Hospital/Private Hospital 4 a) Nature of delivery: Normal/Caeserian5) Which part of the baby’s body came out first? Head/Cord/Other6) Was the amniotic fluid thick and green/yellow?   Yes/NoIf yes, was the mouth cavity of baby cleaned with a gauze piece immediately after 
head came out?  Yes/No
7) When did the baby come out fully? Date: ______________________Record the time of birth: Early morning/morning/afternoon/evening/night
Time: Hours:_____________Minutes______________Seconds__________________8) Immediate actions:         Was action taken:D r y  t h e  b a b y              :  Y e s / N oC o v e r  t h e  b a b y             :  Y e s / N oFor Supervisor#
Correct/Incorrect
Correct/Incorrect 
Action taken 
Yes/No/NA
Yes/No/NA
Yes/No/NAYes/No/NA
Yes/No/NA
Correct/Incorrect 
Correct/Incorrect 
Correct/Incorrect 
Correct/Incorrect Correct/Incorrect Yes/No/NA
Correct/Incorrect 
#: Mar ‘Yes’ if necessary 
and possible action has been taken without any mistake.
Yes/No/NA
Yes/No/NAAnnexes
 679a) Observe the baby at birth:
At 30 seconds At 5 minutes 
a) Cry No/Weak/Forceful No/Weak/Forceful
b) Breathing No/Gasping/Forceful No/Gasping/Forceful
c) Movement of limbs No/Weak/Forceful No/Weak/Forceful
9b) Diagnosis - Normal/Stillbirth 
9c) If still birth - Fresh/Macerated 10) Sex of the child: Male/Female 11) Number of baby/babies born: 1/2/3 12) Actions: Give the mother something to drink immediately after the delivery:    Yes/No13) Time at which placenta came out fully? Hrs_________________Min___________Immediate breastfeeding reduces mother’s bleeding and helps to quicken delivery 
of placenta 
14) Actions:    C o v e r  t h e  b a b y :           Y e s / N o
    K e e p  c l o s e  t o  m o t h e r :         Y e s / N o              Early and exclusive breastfeeding:   Yes/No
15) Special features/Comments/Observations, if any
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________For Supervisors#
Was ASHA present when 
the baby came out?
Yes/No/NA
Correct/Incorrect
Correct/Incorrect 
Yes/No/NA
Yes/No/NA
Yes/No/NAYes/No/NAOther Information#: Mark ‘Yes’ if necessary and possible action has been taken without any mistake 
Name of the ASHA: ___________________________________Date:______________
Name of Trainer/Facilitator: ___________________________________Total Score 
___________Block Name:______________ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
68Annexe 5: First Examination of the Newborn 
(Form)
(Examine one hour a/g286  er the birth but in any case within six hours from the birth. If ASHA is not present 
on the day of delivery then ﬁ  ll the form on the day of  her visit and write the date of  her visit).
Part I:
1)  Date of Birth_________________________________2)  Pre-term cut-off date: ______________________ Is baby pre-term? Yes/No3)  Date of first examination_____________________Time: Early morning     Morning    Afternoon   Evening      Night ________   Hrs_____4)  Does mother have any of the following problems?  a. Excessive bleeding   Yes/No  b. Unconscious/fits       Yes/NoAction: If yes, refer immediately to hospital     Action taken   Yes/No
(In case of stillbirth, do not perform further examination but complete the 
examination of the mother as per home visit form on day 2, 3, 7, 14, 21, 28)5)  What was given as the first feed to baby after birth? __________6)  At what time was the baby first breastfed? Hrs_______Min_______   
How did baby take feed?  Mark    /checkbld  
1)  Forcefully2)  Weakly3)  Could not breastfeed but had to be fed with spoon4)  Could neither breastfeed nor take milk given by spoon
7)  Does the mother have breastfeeding problem? Yes/No
Write the problem________________________________________If there is problem in breastfeeding, help the mother to overcome itPart II:First examination of the baby1)  Temperature of the baby (Measure in axial and record):___________2)  Eyes:   Normal      Swelling or oozing pus3)  Is umbilical cord bleeding:  Yes/NoAction: If yes, either ASHA, ANM or TBA can tie again with clean thread.  Action taken:  Yes/NoFor Supervisor#Correct/IncorrectCorrect/IncorrectFirst examination doneDays:___ Hrs:____After birth
Yes/No/NA
Correct/Incorrect
Correct/Incorrect
Correct/Incorrect
Yes/No/NA
Yes/No/NA
Yes/No/NA
Yes/No/NA
4) Weight: Kg_____ Gm_____ Colour on scale: Red/Yellow/Green Weighing matches with 
the colour? Yes/No
#Mark yes if necessary 
and possible action has been taken without any mistakeAnnexes
 695) Record         /checkbld   X
1.  All limbs limp
2. Feeding less/stop3. Cry weak/stopped 
Routine Newborn Care                             
Whether the task was performed1) Dry the baby                                            Yes/No2) Keep warm, don’t bathe,   wrap in the cloth, keep                         Yes/No closer to mother3) Initiate exclusive breastfeeding            Yes/No
6) Anything unusual in baby? Curved limbs/Cleft lip/Other________________________
___________________________________________________________________________Correct/Incorrect
Yes/No/NA
Yes/No
Yes/No
For Supervisor
Form checked by: Name___________________________________________Date____________________
Corrections:_____________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
Unusual or different observation: __________________________________________________________
Whether the form has been completed?           Yes/No
                                                                                                                                   Signature _________________
Name of ASHA______________________ Date_______________
Name of Trainer_______________________ Total Score__________________________Block__________________________ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
70
Ask/Examine 
Date of ASHA’s visitDay 2 ---------Day 3-----------Day 7-----------Day 14----------Day 21----------Day 28-----------Action by the ASHA Supervisory 
Check 
A. Ask Mother Action Take
No. of times mother takes full meal 
in 24 hrsIf less than 4 times or if meals not full, advise mother to do soY/N Y/N
Bleeding: How many pads are changed in a dayIf more than 5 pads, refer mother to hospital
During the cold season, is the baby being kept warm (near mother, clothed and wrapped properly)Yes/ No/
NAYes/ No/NAYes/ 
No/NAYes/ No/NAYes/ No/NAYes/ No/NAAdvise the mother to do so, if not being done
Is the baby being fed properly (whenever hungry or at least 7-8 times in 24 hrs)Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Advise the mother to 
do so, if not being done
Is baby crying incessantly or passing urine less than 6 times a dayYes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Advise mother to feed 
the baby after every 2 hours
B. Examination of mother 
Temperature: Measure and record Temperature up to 
102 degree F (38.9 degree C)- treat with Paracetamol, and if the temperature is above it, refer to hospital)
Foul smelling discharge and fever more than 100 degree F (37.8 degree C)Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No If yes, refer the mother 
to hospital
Is mother speaking abnormally or having fits?Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No If yes, refer the mother 
to hospital
Mother has no milk since delivery or if perceives breast milk to be lessYes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No
Cracked nipples/painful and/or engorged breast Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/No Yes/NoAnnexe 6:  Home Visit Form (Examination of Mother and Newborn)Annexes
 71Ask/Examine 
Date of ASHA’s visitDay 2 ---------Day 3-----------Day 7-----------Day 14----------Day 21----------Day 28-----------Action by the ASHA Supervisory 
Check 
C. Examination of Baby Action Take
Are the eyes swollen or with pus Y/N Y/N
Weight (on day 7, 14, 21 and 28)
Temperature: Measure and Record Skin: 
Pus filled pustules
Cracks or redness on the skin fold 
(thigh/Axilla/Buttock) 
Yellowness in eyes or skin: 
Jaundice 
D. Check now for the following signs of sepsis: If sign is present mention - Yes, if it is absent, mention - No
Record the observations on Day 1 from the first examination of newborn form 
Ask/Examine Day 1 Day 2 
---------Day 3
-----------Day 7-----------Day 14----------Day 21----------Day 28-----------Action by the 
ASHAAction Taken
Y/N Y/N
All limbs limp
Feeding less/Stopped
Cry weak/Stopped
Distended abdomen or mother says ‘baby 
vomits often’ 
Mother says ‘baby is cold to touch’ or baby’s 
temperature >99 degree F (37.2 degree C)
Chest indrawing
Pus on umbilicus 
Supervisor’s note:  Incomplete work/incorrect work/incorrect record/incorrect record 
Name of ASHA:__________________________________________________________Date:___________________
Name of Trainer/Facilitator:________________________________________________________________________ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
72Annexe 7: Skills Checklist: Handwashing 
Number of Practices
                    Checklist 1 2 3 4 5
1) Remove bangles and wrist watch
2) Wet hands and forearms up to elbow with clean water (Fig. 1)3) Apply soap and scrub forearms, hands and fingers (especially nails) 
thoroughly (Fig 2 to 7)
4) Rinse with clean water5) Air-dry with hands up and elbow facing the ground (Fig 8)6) Do not touch with your hands the ground, floor or dirty objects after 
washing your hand
Note:  Use the checklist while observing the skills being implemented. 
When a step is performed correctly, place a tick ( /checkbld) in the box.
When a step is not performed correctly, place a cross (X) in the  box.Make sure to review the steps where crosses appear, so that performance can be improved.
Annexes
 73Picture/Illustration                    Skills Checklist         For Peer Record 
1234 5
1) Take thermometer out of its storage case, hold at 
broad end, and clean the shinning tip with cotton ball soaked in spirit. 
2) Press the pink button once to turn the 
thermometer on. You will see “188.8” flash in the centre of the display window, then a dash (-), then the last temperature taken and then three dashes (- - - ) and a flashing “F” in the upper right corner.
3) Hold the thermometer upward and place the 
shinning tip in the centre of the armpit. Place arm against it. Do not change the position. 
4) You will hear a beep sound every 4 seconds while 
the thermometer is recording the temperature. When you hear 3 short beeps, look at the display.  When “F” stops flashing and the number stop changing, remove the thermometer. 
5) Read the number in the display window.
6) Record the temperature reading on the form.7) Turn the thermometer off by pushing the pink 
button one time.
8) Clean the shinning tip of the thermometer with a 
cotton ball soaked in spirit.
9) Place thermometer back in its storage.Annexe 8: Skills Checklist: 
Measuring Temperature
ASHA Module 6
Simple Skills that Save Lives
74Annexe 9: Skills Checklist: Weighing the Baby
Scale Type 1: 
Picture/Illustration Skills Checklist For Practice
12345
      1. Place the sling on scale 
2. Hold scale by top bar off the floor, 
keeping the adjustment knob at eye level.
3. Turn the screw until its top fully covers 
the red and ‘O’ is visible.
   
                                                          4. Remove sling on hook and place it on a 
clean cloth on the ground.
5. Place body with minimum clothes on, in 
sling and replace the sling on hook.
          6. Holding top bar carefully, as you stand up, lift the scale and sling with baby off the ground, until the knob is at eye level.
7. Read the weight.
8. Gently put the sling with baby in it, on 
the ground and unhook the sling.
9. Remove the baby from the sling and 
hand it over to its mother.
10. Record the weight. 
Scale Type 2:
Salter Scale 
 Weighing machine (for up to 10 kg)75Acronyms
ANM Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
ASHA Accredited Social Health ActivistAWC Anganwadi CentreAWW Anganwadi WorkerARI Acute Respiratory InfectionANC Antenatal CareAIDS Acquired Immuno-deﬁ  ciency Syndrome 
ART Anti-Retroviral TherapyBEmoC Basic Emergency Obstetric Care BCG Bacillus Calme/g308  e-Guerin
BPNI  Breastfeeding Promotion Network of IndiaCEmoC Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric CareCHC Community Health Centre DPT  Diphtheria, Tetanus and PertussisEDD Expected Date of DeliveryFRU First Referral UnitGP Gram PanchayatGV paint Gentian Violet paintHBNC Home-Based Newborn CareIFA Iron Folic AcidIMNCI  Integrated Management of Neonatal Childhood IllnessesLBW Low Birth WeightLMP Last Menstrual Period MO Medical Oﬃ   cer 
ORS  Oral Rehydration SolutionPHC Primary Health CentrePRI Panchayati Raj Institution  SBA                   Skilled Birth A/g308  endant 
TB TuberculosisTT Tetanus Toxoid UNICEF United Nations Children’s FundVHND  Village Health and Nutrition DayVHSC Village Health and Sanitation Commi/g308  ee 
Acronyms