Peer Educator’s
Reference Booklet on
Adolescent Health
Frequently Asked Questions

Abbreviations
AB-HWCs Ayushman Bharat - Health and Wellness Centres 
AFC Adolescent Friendly Club 
AFHCs Adolescent Friendly Health Clinics
AFHS Adolescent Friendly Health Services 
AHWD Adolescent Health and Wellness Day
AIDS Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
ANM Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
ART Antiretroviral Therapy 
ASHAs Accredited Social Health Activists 
AWC Anganwadi Centre 
AWW Anganwadi Worker 
BMI Body Mass Index
CAB COVID Appropriate Behaviour 
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
CPO Child Protection Officer 
CRC Convention on the Rights of the Child 
ECPs Emergency Contraceptive Pills
FLWs Frontline Workers 
GBV Gender-based Violence
GoI Government of India
HCWs Healthcare Workers 
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
IFA Iron and Folic Acid
IUCD Intra-Uterine Contraceptive Device 
IUDs Intra-Uterine Devices 
MHS Menstrual Hygiene Scheme 
MoHFW Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
MTP Medical Termination of Pregnancy 
NCDs Non-Communicable Diseases
NCPCR National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
NHM National Health Mission
NTQLS National Tobacco Quit Line Services 
OCPs Oral Contraceptive Pills 
PE Peer Education/Educator
PID Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
POSCO Act, 2012 Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
PPTCT Prevention of Parent to Child Transmission
RKSK Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram
RTIs Reproductive Tract Infections 
SRH  Sexual and Reproductive Health
STIs Sexually Transmitted Infections 
VHSNC Village Health, Sanitation and Nutrition Committee
WIFS Weekly Iron Folic Acid Supplementation viiContents 



Adolescent 
Peer Educator ProgrammeModule 1
Adolescence is a promising but delicate phase of life when children need the utmost 
care and support to realize their full potential. Yet, some of their concerns often go 
unnoticed. Our culture inhibits an open dialogue between adolescents and adults 
like parents and teachers, especially on personal subjects like those related to 
bodily changes, love, marriage and relationships. In such matters adolescents are 
found to be more comfortable with their peers. During this phase, adolescents also 
experience frequent mood swings. The feeling of isolation and likelihood of being 
misunderstood by elders and parents is relatively high.
We recognize that adolescents (irrespective of sex, age, caste, religion, marital 
status), like adults, have the right to access information, counselling and services on 
concerns that may impact their health, education, safety and overall well-being. 
Hence, RKSK aims to reach out to this special group through their own peers who 
can be trained on a range of issues and concerns that may be perplexing adolescent 
minds. The approach adapted will take care to maintain privacy, confidentiality and 
a non-judgmental attitude towards adolescents seeking help. The approach will 
focus on enhancing the skills and capacities of adolescents by providing them with 
information, counselling, curative and preventive services.Introduction
What is Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram?
RKSK covers six broad themes as priority 
for adolescents. SRH; Mental 
and emotional well-being; 
NCDs; Injuries and violence 
(including gender-based 
violence); Nutrition; 
Substance misuse.
The focus is on building 
the skills and capacities of 
adolescent girls and boys to 
resolve their health concerns 
through rights-based access to service of 
choice (information, counselling, curative, 
preventive and/or referral for legal aid in 
case of violence).
What is peer 
education?
Peer education means learning from one’s peers or 
‘education of young people by young people’. It is the 
process of sharing information among members of a 
specific community or group of young people to achieve 
positive outcomes for health and well-being.
What is the 
need for peer 
education in 
adolescent 
health?
- During adolescence, one spends or likes to spend 
maximum time with one’s peers.
 - Adolescents make friends fast and in large numbers.
 - There is a bond with friends that becomes even stronger 
than other relations. Adolescents often trust the wisdom 
of friends more than that of the elders including parents.
 - If one has to seek help, one approaches a friend who may 
also be uninformed or may have incorrect information, 
which could be dangerous. A friend who is informed and 
trained is an asset.
 - This is an effort by the government to reach out to all 
adolescents in the community through trained PEs who 
are trusted friends and will be an asset to any adolescent.

What is the PE 
Programme in 
RKSK?
Es are adolescents between 15 and 19 years of age from 
the community/village. Each village (1,000 population) is 
expected to have four PEs, of which two PEs (one male 
and one female) will be selected to work with adolescents 
in school, and two PEs will be selected to work with 
adolescents who are out of school.
The PE Programme aims to reach adolescents in a 
friendly way through trained adolescent PEs from the 
community. The Programme will:
 - Promote learning from trained peers
 - Promote support seeking through these peers
 - Help reduce fears or barriers experienced otherwise 
by adolescents
 - Increase access to scientific and reliable sources
 - Help establish an information and support network 
among adolescents across the country

Who are PEs 
and how can 
they help us?
The trained PEs will help adolescents learn about 
different issues that are important for their health and 
development, clarify their doubts on various topics and 
resolve their concerns through scientific facts. PEs can 
also help adolescents access medical or legal help, if 
required, without breaching confidentiality.

What are the 
roles of a PE?
- To identify and reach out to adolescents between 
10 and 19 years of age irrespective of gender, caste, 
religion or marital status
- To respect every adolescent and assure him/her 
that you are his/her friend
- To inform and educate adolescents about issues 
important for their health and development 
- To build a rapport in the community and win the 
trust of peers
- To inform and educate adolescents about RKSK
- To seek support from respected members of the 
community and parents to carry out his/her role
- To support organization of AHWDs in their community 
- To refer adolescents to AFHCs or the nearest 
Ayushman Bharat - Health and Wellness Centres 
(AB-HWCs) as per need
- To form groups of adolescents and hold weekly sessions 
with them on various themes of RKSK
- To attend the monthly AFC meetings at the sub centre 
organized by the Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM)

Adolescents knowingly or unknowingly spend more time with their friends and peers. 
Self-initiated interactions with adults are minimal. Some adults look at peer influence 
with concern while some take their help to reach out to their children. Friends can be 
good or bad, informed or misinformed, and so their influence may be positive or negative. 
However, the PE Programme endeavours to utilize the positive aspect of peer influence.
Adolescent peer education is a process whereby well trained and motivated adolescents 
carry out informal or organized educational activities with their peers (those similar 
to themselves in age, background or interest). This is carried out over a period of time 
through either small group interactions or through one-to-one interaction or even when 
someone seeks help to resolve an issue. It aims at developing knowledge, attitudes, 
beliefs and skills among peers on a range of issues relevant to them and enables them to 
be responsible for and protect their own health. It can be conducted in a variety of safe 
settings like schools, playgrounds, a friend’s house, Anganwadi Centre (AWC), Panchayat 
Bhawan, a tea stall and/or any place where adolescents gather for recreation/leisure. An 
adolescent health PE has the potential to become a good friend to his/her peers. As a PE 
one should remember that ‘trust’ and ‘confidence’ are the pillars of peer education.

What is friendly 
health service?
‘Friendly’ adolescent health service is 
the one that:
 - Respects adolescent clients
 - Is equipped to provide adolescents with 
services as they need and are appealing 
to them 
 - Ensures their privacy while discussing 
problem/s with the service providers
 - Tries to minimize waiting hours
  - Maintains strict confidentiality about the 
concerns of the adolescent client
 - Is considerate when dealing with 
adolescents and does not stigmatize them
 - Does not make judgments about their 
behaviour
  - Promotes adolescent health check-up to 
lead a healthy future
  - Helps adolescent clients identify the root 
cause and take positive steps to avoid such 
situations in future


What are the 
qualities of a 
PE?
A PE is a ‘trusted friend’ who helps adolescent friends 
learn about issues pertaining to their health, which they 
otherwise may not be comfortable discussing with adults 
or service providers. This trusted friend will never breach 
trust, will provide privacy, maintain confidentiality and 
will not have a judgmental attitude. One should also 
support or protect those who are being targeted.
Some of the other qualities of a PE are given below:
• Ability to keep abreast of new information and 
knowledge
• Ability to listen and communicate effectively
• Ability to build trust and comfort with peers 
• Ability to deal with emotions and difficult situations
• Ability to express emotions
• Adaptive and flexible nature
• Ability to encourage and provide support
• Ability to lead by example
• Ability to look at things from various perspectives
• Sensitivity to gender issues


How can I 
become a 
good PE? 
As a PE or a true friend, one has to cultivate and reach 
out to a large number of adolescents. Some knowledge 
about them and being sensitive to their likes and dislikes 
irrespective of their social, educational or economic 
background would help bring them closer. This further 
reinforces trust between two people. As a true PE, one 
should not discriminate against anyone and always try 
to include all those in the larger youth group who are 
otherwise excluded in the community. Remembering the 
names of peers is a step towards this. This shows that you 
value them and their friendship.

How can I 
start my work 
as a PE?
• As a first step, you need to identify adolescent girls and 
boys in your community or in a given area. ASHA didi will 
help you in this.
• Establish contact with the adolescents and their families 
and introduce yourself and the purpose of your work.
• Reach out to adolescents who are out of school or those 
from marginalized communities. Include all irrespective 
of religion, caste, class, gender and marital status. Be 
respectful to them. Record their name, age, education 
and livelihood, if any.
• Ask for their contact details, address and phone number 
if they have a phone.
• Form small groups with 15–20 members in each group. 
There are eight modules which will be covered over a 
time period of 15 weeks (conducting one session a week 
for each peer group). Once 15 sessions with a group are 
completed, you can initiate similar sessions with a new 
group and meet the previous group once in two weeks or as required. You can also 
take the help of some of the members of the previous group in reaching out to 
new adolescents.
• With the consensus of group members select one volunteer member to assist you 
in coordinating the group in your absence. He/she will have the contact details of 
all group members and will convey messages like session days and timing to all 
members and gather them for the group session. Each group member can act as a 
volunteer in rotation so that everyone has a chance to practise leadership.
• Fix a date and time for group sessions for each of your groups.
• During the introductory session take assurance from all members that they will 
attend all 15 sessions. With the consensus of all members, give the group a name. 
This will help group members share ownership of the group they belong to.
• Both male and female PEs along with their PE coordinator (ASHA didi) should contact 
the village Sarpanch  or Mukhiya  and other well-known people like the school principal 
to provide a clean and safe space for your group sessions such as the Panchayat 
Bhavan, the local school, the AWC or even a peer’s house. The PEs can decide 
separate days or timings for their group sessions and inform their groups accordingly.
• Along with ASHA didi ensure that the space is safe and easily accessible so that 
group members do not face resistance from parents in visiting the place. The 
Panchayat Bhavan or the local school would be ideal. Invite your peer mentors - 
ASHA didi, Anganwadi Worker (AWW) didi, teacher or others as assigned to join 
you as this will provide credibility to your work.
• Though most of the sessions are to be conducted separately, with the support 
of the ASHA didi or AWW didi or teacher or any person assigned, the male and 
female PEs can collaborate and organize a joint session, cultural programme, quiz 
or debates between the male and female members of the two groups on the 
issues learnt.
• Put up a Question Box for adolescents to drop their queries into. Fix a date to 
open the Question Box and answer queries with the help of the ASHA/ANM didi. 
Inform all group members in the locality about the day the queries 
will be answered. 

How shall 
I introduce 
myself as a PE?
It is important to introduce yourself and your purpose 
clearly to avoid any confusion among adolescents and 
their families. Tell them your name and share your address 
and/or telephone number. Inform them about RKSK, show 
your badge/cap or an identity that has been provided by 
the State Health Department. Inform them briefly about 
your work and how and when you will be contacting 
them for sessions. Also inform them that, if necessary, the 
adolescents can contact you for help. Inform the village 
Sarpanch/Mukhiya  or other elderly people before starting 
your work. You can also invite the village elders for an 
introductory session and invite your mentors to help you 
with this.

What is my role as a PE with respect 
to my peer group members and 
community?
As a PE, you will be required to play various roles in the 
community and among your peers:
• Build a rapport with adolescents, tell them that you 
are new, but may be of some help to them and that 
you can also put them in touch with the right people 
if any help or service is required.
• Invite them for sessions or try to establish informal 
dialogue with them.
• Share your name, work and contact details.
• Conduct weekly sessions as given in the Resource Book (15 sessions over a period 
of 15 weeks).
• Help adolescents clarify myths and misconceptions with regard to health and 
protection issues.
• Set up a Question Box in front of the Panchayat Bhavan and school for 
adolescents to drop their concerns and queries regarding their health. During the 
first session introduce the Question Box and inform members that no adolescent 
is expected to write his/her name in the query as answers will be discussed in a 
group session. During these days the ASHA didi, AWW didi, ANM didi or any other 
informed person will be available to help answer the queries. Even if by mistake 
someone writes his/her name, the PE or the invited guest will not disclose it and 
will maintain confidentiality of the person. All queries, if required, will be neatly 
typed with answers for the group members to learn from them. The posted 
queries will be destroyed after they are answered and recorded.
• Provide referral service with regard to medical or protection needs of adolescents 
in crisis.
• Maintain confidentiality all through.
• Organize awareness activities on issues with the help of group members, and 
ASHA, AWW, teachers or any person assigned as coordinator/facilitator/mentor 
and other respected members of the village.
• Inform mentors, the village elders, police or Child Protection Officer (CPO) if you 
come to know of cases of violence (like child marriage, domestic violence, eve 
teasing, molestation etc.) in the community, especially against children 
and adolescents.
• Help victims of violence reach medical care and counselling and gain access to 
legal aid.


Who will guide me in my work as a PE?
You are not alone in completing this task. You will be supported by the ASHA didi, 
teacher, counsellor, ANM didi, AWW didi, or any other informed person in the 
community, who has been oriented on your role as a PE. They will be your mentors 
and are named peer mentors.
Introduce yourself to your peer mentors, who can 
be contacted any day with their permission. You 
can also invite them for the introductory session 
with your peer group. They can help you 
in addressing queries posted by the group 
members in the Question Box. The role of the peer 
mentors is:
• To support PEs in carrying out their duties
• To help PEs reach out to adolescents (especially 
those out of school and most marginalized)
10• To help PEs introduce their work to village elders including the 
Sarpanch/Mukhiya
• To help PEs get a safe space in the community to conduct groups sessions and 
peer group interactions, such as the Panchayat Bhavan, the local school or the 
AWC, that is easily accessible, safe and acceptable to community members
• To help PEs resolve any problem in carrying out their work
• To ensure correctness of messages being delivered by PEs
• To help adolescents clarify myths and misconceptions and answer queries posted 
by them in the Question Box
• To provide referral to adolescent clients brought by the PEs, if necessary
• To help PEs maintain a daily diary of their work and report at the end of 
every month


How will I conduct PE
sessions with identified 
peers?
You can carry out your role in the 
following manner:
• Formal group sessions
• Informal small group interactions 
or one-to-one interactions
You need to conduct group sessions as given in the PE Activity Book over the 
12 months. You are expected to take one formal group session once a month. You 
will also be provided with a checklist to keep track of topics discussed with each of 
your peer groups.
You can coordinate two groups (if possible) with 15–20 members in each group 
simultaneously every month.1

What are 
AFCs?
Adolescent Friendly Clubs are formed at the sub-centre level 
and meetings organized once a month under the overall 
guidance of ANM. 
These typically cover five villages/5000 population 
composed of 10-20 PEs/ Saathiyas  each. During these 
meetings, Saathiyas  from different villages will meet and 
clarify issues which they have encountered during their 
weekly sessions with the help of ANM and other PEs. They 
can also plan for upcoming sessions and AHWDs.



What are 
AHWDs? 
AHWD is one of the interventions under RKSK to improve 
coverage with preventive and promotive interventions for 
adolescents and increase awareness among them, their 
parents, families, and community about issues and needs 
related to adolescent health. 
AHWDs are conducted once in every quarter at AWCs/
schools/other easily reachable spaces. As a PE, you 
can help: 
• ASHA didi in listing all adolescents 
• Work closely with ASHA didi to conduct village 
sensitization and mobilize adolescents, parents, 
families, school teachers for participating in AHWD
• Link back to adolescents in the community for follow-
up on specific issues/problems


How am I 
expected to 
report to the 
PE Coordinator 
about my 
work?
You are required to meet the PE Coordinator every week 
and fill out some forms. These are easy to fill, and in case 
you have any difficulty your PE Coordinator will help you 
complete it. You will be provided with the forms by your 
peer mentors.

D. Action Plan/Content Check List for Peer Educator
(to be maintained for one or more peer groups being facilitated by each PE)  

Sessions/Topics to be covered by PE through Group Sessions (Those covered should 
be ticked and those not covered can be crossed)
- Pubertal changes
- Gender identity
- Dealing with peer 
pressure
- Child marriage
- Menstruation
 - Respecting diversity
 - Preventing substance 
misuse (alcohol and 
smoking)
 - Nightfall
 - Undernutrition and 
anaemia
 - Personal hygiene
 - Risk factors for health 
conditions related to 
lifestyle
 - Managing emotion 
and stress
 - Preventing 
adolescent pregnancy
 - Responding to 
violence against 
children/adolescents
 - Preventing gender
based violence 
(violence against 
adolescent girls and 
women)
- RTIs and STIs
- Knowing our rights 
and entitlements
- Minimizing risks to 
prevent accidents 
and injuries
- Preventing HIV and 
AIDS
- Community 
sanitation and 
hygiene


Pre and post-session information:
1. About RKSK, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW)
2. Introducing PEs and peer mentors (ASHA, ANM)
3. Informing about providers and service delivery points (including referral service) 
to seek services and help if required

What is puberty? What 
happens during puberty in 
both girls and boys?
Puberty is the time when the body begins to develop and change from being a 
child to an adult. Puberty is controlled by hormones, and these hormones affect 
emotions as well as body.
Changes that take place in both girls and boys:
  Skin and hair become oily
  Acne also known as zits or pimples develop on face and body
  More sweating and body odour (when sweat smells bad)
  Hair growth under armpits
  Hair growth around genitals (pubic hair)
  More hair growth on arms and legs
  Pain in arms and legs as there is growth
  Weight and height gain
Changes that take place only in boys:
  Voice gets lower or deeper and may crack sometimes but that is totally normal 
and eventually stabilizes
  Adam’s apple which is the bump in your throat might get bigger and more 
visible as this happens
  Penis and testicles get bigger
  Hair may grow on face, chest, and back
  Chest and shoulders get broader
  The area around nipples may start to swell. This 
can look like breasts developing, but it usually 
goes away. This happens to about half of the male 
population, and it can last for a few months or up 
to a few years
  Ejection of semen from the penis which is a normal 
part of puberty
Changes that take place only in girls:
  Breasts develop and become bigger
  Nipples may become darker
  Hips get wider and body may become curvier.
  Start getting menstruation, also known as periods
  A tiny bit of sticky, whitish fluid may come out of 
the vagina


 When do pubertal changes 
start in boys?
Pubertal changes (physical and sexual maturation of adolescent 
boys and girls) may start appearing from 10 years of age, while 
pubic hair usually grow between 11 to 14 years of age. The age 
for growth spurt varies from one adolescent to another.
If an adolescent and his/her parents feel that the pubertal 
changes are too early or delayed, they should consult an ANM 
or doctor.


Can pubertal changes 
occur early? When should 
one consult a doctor?
Yes, in some adolescents pubertal changes may 
occur early. Pubertal changes among girls before 
the age of eight years or its absence by 13 years 
and among boys before the age of nine years and 
its absence by the age of 14 years may be a cause 
of concern. In such cases, consultation with a 
doctor is important to get the right advice.

Does puberty affect 
emotions too and make 
adolescents moody?
Yes, puberty does have an impact on emotions. This change 
in emotions or ‘moody behaviour’ is either because of the 
hormones or the changes taking place, or both! Emotions may 
seem like they are out of control. One minute you may feel 
happy and on top of the world, and the next minute you may 
feel low or sad.
If you feel that you cannot handle your emotions, talk to a 
helpful adult such as elder sibling, teacher or counsellor.


What is an 
erection? I get 
an erection 
when I see a 
girl in my class, 
how can I 
control that?
An erection is when blood flows into the penis faster than 
it flows out, and makes the spongy tissue in the penis 
swell. When a boy has an erection, the penis gets bigger 
and harder. It may stick straight out, or curve up or down. 
Erections can happen at any point in your life, even when 
you are a baby. However, you start getting erections more 
often during puberty. Erections can happen sometimes 
due to sexual excitement or touching and stimulating the 
penis and sometimes it may happen due to none of these 
reasons. It is nothing to feel shy or embarrassed about. 
Boys may experience an erection during puberty while 
sitting in the class, walking on the street, just anywhere 
and not because they are thinking of something specific.

What are 
hormones?
Hormones are the body’s special chemical messengers 
that help it carry out certain processes. Hormones carry 
messages through the blood to the various organs of the 
body to help carry out their functions. There are many 
different types of hormones that are responsible for 
different functions of the body. One of these messages the 
hormones carry is telling the various organs of your body 
that it is time to start changing and begin the process of 
puberty, meaning growing up and developing the body to 
become an adult.

What is nocturnal 
emission/nightfall?
Formation and discharge of semen 
can occur during mid-adolescence 
and manifests as nocturnal 
emission.
It signifies reproductive maturity 
for an adolescent boy. Nocturnal 
emission, also known as nightfall, 
is normal and does not require 
any form of treatment. Still 
many adolescent boys are stressed about this and go for 
treatments that may be extremely harmful to their health.

Is nocturnal 
emission 
harmful?
It does not represent loss of manhood or sexual weakness; 
it is essentially harmless and does not require any 
treatment. Adolescent boys need to be reassured so that 
it does not become a cause for embarrassment or undue 
worry. As the body continuously produces semen and 
sperms, the loss through nocturnal emission is replaced.

How and whom to 
contact to get rid 
of concerns related 
to nocturnal 
emission?
Nocturnal emission is a natural process and hence 
does not require any treatment. Its occurrence/
frequency will gradually decrease as one attains 
maturity. If one still has doubts about it, one 
should consult a doctor at the nearest hospital/
dispensary.

Why do we 
have pubic 
hair near our 
genitals? Pubic hair appears at puberty. It is an obvious physical sign 
of sexual maturity. Pubic hair serves a similar function as 
eyelashes or nose hair. It traps dirt, debris, and potentially 
harmful microorganisms.
In addition, hair follicles produce sebum, an oil which 
actually prevents bacteria from reproducing.

Is breast development 
normal in 
boys?
In some boys, breast development can become prominent; 
this is normal and will subside eventually on its own.
However, if they are too prominent the condition is called 
‘gynaecomastia’ and needs treatment. Sometimes extreme 
obesity can also lead to apparent increase of male  
breast tissue.

What should 
be the size of 
the penis?
Concerns about the size of penis and testicles are common 
among boys, especially in relation to sexual abilities. The 
size of the penis has no relation to sexual performance. The 
penis doubles in length and width during adolescence with 
most rapid growth taking place between 14 and 16 years. 
The width or length of the penis varies from person to 
person. The average penis size (when flaccid) is 3–4 inches 
in length and 1 inch in diameter. The penis may also have 
slight curvature to left or right, which is normal. The size of 
the two testicles may also vary and the left one generally 
hangs lower than the right.

What is 
masturbation?
Masturbation is simply when a person touches his/her 
own body, especially private parts for sexual pleasure or 
happiness – because it feels good.

Why do people 
masturbate?
During puberty, as we discussed earlier there are a lot 
of hormones released in the body. These hormones also 
cause the reproductive or sexual organs to become more 
active, and feelings of excitement or pleasure may develop. 
These feelings can also cause us to masturbate, which 
is normal.

Is masturbation 
bad for us? 
Masturbation is not unhealthy or bad if it is done in 
moderation and in private. If masturbation is being 
used as an alternative to other means of relaxation or 
positive social activities and affecting functionality, then a 
counsellor or therapist should be consulted. 

Is it normal for adolescents to 
fall in love?
Yes, adolescents often fall in love. They may feel 
attracted to a friend or a person of the opposite 
or same sex. It is natural to have special feelings 
for someone. It is important for adolescents to 
understand that such relationships are based on 
mutual consent, trust, commitment and respect. 
It is good to express your feelings to the person 
you feel for but always in a respectful way. One 
should also be prepared to accept the other 
person’s decision to not be friends with dignity 
and decency. Boys should know that when a girl says ‘No’ it means ‘No’. One should 
learn to respect the personal space of a girl/boy as the case may be.
Feelings during adolescent years may change over time as one grows into an 
adult. This is also normal and one should learn to accept it. Adolescents should 
try and understand one another and help each other pursue their educational or 
professional dreams.

Is it okay to 
feel attracted 
to many 
people at the 
same time?As you grow, there will be lots of changes taking place 
in your body that may affect your daily life, feelings and 
relationships with others. As this happens, it is normal to 
start having strong feelings of attraction towards others. 
This attraction can be towards one person or many and it 
is normal. You may feel shy or embarrassed or conscious or 
nervous when you see them and talk to them.
You do have control over how you react or your behaviour. It is important to 
remember that the behaviour you choose shows respect towards the other person’s 
personal boundaries. It is not alright to cross these personal boundaries just because 
you are attracted towards them. It is also a good idea to talk to a helpful adult about 
these feelings. They may help you understand and handle it in a safe manner. 

How can 
young boys 
keep their 
genital area 
clean?
Washing the penis and testicles: The penis should be 
washed gently with normal water every day. If soap is 
applied it should be a mild one, as harsh soaps cause 
soreness. Adolescent boys having foreskin should pull 
it back gently and wash underneath. If the skin under 
the foreskin is not washed correctly, smegma (a natural 
lubricant keeping the penis moist) may begin to gather and 
cause bacterial growth emitting a bad smell. In acute cases, 
the penis head may become red and swollen causing pain, 
irritation and discomfort. Deodorants or talcum powder 
should be avoided as they may collect under the foreskin. 
For circumcised adolescents care should be taken while 
cleaning the penis; washing the penis gently with normal 
or warm water once a day is sufficient. One should not 
forget to clean the base of the penis and testicles as sweat 
and dirt may cause irritation.

How does menstruation take place?
In females during the menstrual cycle, the inner 
lining of the uterus grows and thickens. At the same 
time, the female egg is growing in the ovaries. 
When the egg matures, it leaves the ovary to reach 
the uterus through fallopian tubes. If the egg is 
not fertilized and pregnancy does not occur, non-
fertilized egg breaks and the thickened lining of the 
uterus is shed and exits the body through vagina 
as a mixture of blood and tissue. This is called 
menstruation.

When do 
pubertal 
changes 
start?Pubertal changes (physical and sexual maturation of 
adolescent boys and girls) may start appearing from nine 
years of age (largely height or weight gain). However, 
secondary sexual characteristics like development of 
breasts, development of hair on external genitalia, 
development in size of uterus, ovaries along with 
physiological changes like menstruation usually start 
between 11 and 13 years of age. The age for growth spurt 
varies from one adolescent to another. If an adolescent and 
his/her parents feel that the pubertal changes are early or 
delayed, they should consult a doctor or ANM.

What should adolescent girls do to 
overcome fear, pain and discomfort 
during menstruation?
Adolescent girls should not feel ashamed or guilty of having 
menstruation; they should follow their daily routines with a bit 
of extra nutrition and hygiene during these days.
• The pain in the lower abdomen and heaviness is common 
and can be eased by having hot water bath, use of hot 
bottle, hot drinks, antispasmodic medicines and light 
exercise like walking, stretching etc. This will help improve 
blood circulation and lessen pain.
• One should use sanitary napkins to absorb the blood loss. 
In case sanitary napkins are not available, one can use 
clean, old, soft cotton cloth, washed and dried in the sun. 
Napkins should be changed at least three times a day.
• Sanitary napkins can be disposed off by dumping them into 
a deep pit, burning or wrapping in paper and putting them 
in the waste bin for garbage processing.
• One should bathe daily and clean genital area with water 
and mild soap.


At what age 
does a girl 
normally 
have her first 
period?
Most girls have their first period between 11 and 14 years 
of age. Some girls may have it as early as eight years while 
some may have it as late as 16 years. If you are more than 
16 years old and your periods haven’t started then a doctor 
should be consulted.

What is a 
menstrual 
cycle?
The time between the first day of a menstrual period and 
the beginning of the next one is referred to as a menstrual 
cycle. The length of the menstrual cycle varies from girl to 
girl. For most girls their menstrual cycle is close to 28 days. 
It appears as if periods happen once every month. For 
some girls, the menstrual cycle can be as short as 21 days 
while for some girls it can be as long as 35 days. 

Why are 
periods 
irregular?
Hormones play a critical role in the menstrual process. 
When menstruation first starts during the adolescent 
years, these hormone systems are not yet fully developed. 
It may take around two years for periods to become 
regular. Before periods become regular, early or delayed 
periods are common. Sometimes an irregular period may 
be due to slight hormonal imbalances. It is best to contact 
a doctor to find out more about any specific concerns that 
you might have.

From where 
can one get 
disposable 
sanitary 
napkins?In some states, MoHFW supports menstrual hygiene 
among adolescent girls (10-19 years) through a scheme, 
under which the price of sanitary napkins is subsidized at 
Rs. 6 per pack (six pads in each pack). These are available 
with ASHA didi in the village. Besides this, many states are 
distributing napkins through ANMs/AWWs.
• All chemists and general stores keep sanitary napkins. 
These can be chosen and purchased from a wide range 
to suit need, comfort and budget.
• AFHS at the sub-centre, Primary Health Centre (PHC) 
and Community Health Centre (CHC) as well as the 
ANM, ASHA and AWW didis  provide counselling and 
services on menstrual hygiene management.

Can a girl take 
bath during 
menstruation?
Yes, bathing during menstruation is important to maintain 
hygiene. Menstruation is not ‘unclean’ or ‘polluting’. 
If managed hygienically, girls can carry out all activities 
including schooling, outdoor games, cooking, preparing 
pickles, and performing regular duties with comfort 
and dignity.


Does the 
onset of 
menstruation 
mean that a 
girl is ready for 
marriage and 
pregnancy?
The onset of menstruation signifies internal changes in 
the adolescent girl. It does not mean that the girl has the 
overall maturity to carry the pregnancy and give birth to a 
child. A woman should not have her first pregnancy before 
attaining at least 20 years of age. In our society, child 
marriage is very common and adolescent girls are at high 
risk of unplanned and unsafe pregnancies.

What should 
a girl do if 
her breasts 
are not well 
developed?
It is normal to have small or flat breasts. It is also normal 
that the size of the two breasts may vary initially but 
this is not a cause for concern. One should not worry 
unnecessarily. In case of excessive worry, consult an  
ANM/doctor.

How can young 
girls keep their 
genital area 
clean?
Washing the external female genitalia: The genitalia should 
be washed using normal water; if soap is used, it should 
be mild. Make sure to wash it from the front towards the 
back. A slight vaginal smell is normal and can be checked 

What is 
nutrition?
Nutrition is the study of nutrients in food, how the body 
uses nutrients, and the relationship between diet, health 
and disease.

What are 
nutrients?
Nutrients are compounds in foods essential to life and 
health, providing us with energy, the building blocks for 
repair and growth and substances necessary to regulate 
chemical processes. There are six major nutrients: 
Carbohydrates, Fats, Proteins, Vitamins, Minerals, Water.

What are 
macro and 
micronutrients?
 Macronutrients are nutrients needed by the body in larger 
quantities, e.g., carbohydrates, proteins, fats.
 Micronutrients are needed by the body in smaller 
amounts, e.g., vitamins and minerals


What is good nutrition and 
balanced diet?
Adolescents need to consume sufficient food 
from each of the different food groups to 
meet all the nutrient needs. 
• The tip of the pyramid is 
foods that are high in fats (oils) 
and sugar. These are energy 
giving but are needed in small 
quantities in the daily diet.
• Next, milk and milk products 
such as curd, paneer  and 
buttermilk along with meat, poultry, fish and eggs are body building foods and 
can be consumed in moderate amount.
• Seasonal vegetables and fruits which are grown and available locally should be 
taken in adequate amount.
• The base of the pyramid shows that these foods should be consumed in large 
quantities like wheat, rice and pulses. They are the main source of energy giving 
food and provide natural fibres also. 
• Drink plenty of water to keep yourself hydrated. What is 
nutrition?Nutrition is the study of nutrients in food, how the body 
uses nutrients, and the relationship between diet, health 
and disease.

What is the estimated average requirement of nutrients 
for adolescents?
Gender: Male, Age: 10-12 yrs, Energy (kcal/d): 2200, Protein (gms/d): 27, Calcium (mg): 650, Iron (mg): 12;
Gender: Male, Age: 13-15 yrs, Energy (kcal/d): 2850, Protein (gms/d): 36, Calcium (mg): 800, Iron (mg): 15;
Gender: Male, Age: 16-18 yrs, Energy (kcal/d): 3320, Protein (gms/d): 45, Calcium (mg): 850, Iron (mg): 18;
Gender: Female, Age: 10-12 yrs, Energy (kcal/d): 2060, Protein (gms/d): 27, Calcium (mg): 650, Iron (mg): 16;
Gender: Female, Age: 13-15 yrs, Energy (kcal/d): 2400, Protein (gms/d): 35, Calcium (mg): 800, Iron (mg): 17;
Gender: Female, Age: 16-18 yrs, Energy (kcal/d): 2500, Protein (gms/d): 37, Calcium (mg): 850, Iron (mg): 18;


What is malnutrition?
Malnutrition refers to deficiencies, excesses, or imbalances 
in a person’s intake of energy and/or nutrients. The term 
malnutrition addresses three broad groups of conditions:
• Undernutrition, which includes wasting (low weight-for-
height), stunting (low height-for-age) and underweight 
(low weight-for-age);
• Micronutrient-related malnutrition, which includes 
micronutrient deficiencies (a lack of important vitamins 
and minerals) or micronutrient excess; and
• Overweight, obesity and diet-related NCDs (such as 
heart disease, stroke, diabetes and some cancers).


Why do adolescents need nutritious food?
• Nutritional need is higher during adolescence than in childhood or adulthood.
• Girls and boys gain up to 50 per cent of their adult weight and more than 20 
per cent of their adult height, and 50 per cent of their adult skeletal/bone mass 
during adolescence.
• To ensure calcium levels in bones.
• Balanced nutritional habits during 
adolescence prevent weak/brittle bones, 
obesity, heart disease and diabetes later 
on in life.
• Girls require additional iron 
supplementation to make up for blood 
loss during menstruation and calcium to 
strengthen bones.
• Good nutrition supports timely sexual maturation.
• Adolescence is the perfect stage to form good eating habits and set the tone for a 
lifetime of healthy eating.

What are the signs of undernutrition 
and what could be its consequences if 
not treated?
Signs of undernutrition:
• Fatigue
• Dizziness
• Poor concentration in studies or other work
• Dry skin
• Spongy bleeding gums
• Thin and soft nails
• Weak immune system (falling sick often)
• Fragile bones that break easily
Consequences of undernutrition: 
• Growth failure and stunting 
• Delayed sexual development 
• Reduced muscle mass and body strength 
• Impaired memory/memory loss/forgetfulness
• Poor school performance
• Pregnancy and birth complications in girls 
• School absenteeism
• Anaemia
• Scurvy
• Micronutrient deficiencies 

What is 
anaemia?
Anaemia refers to low haemoglobin level in the blood. 
A common cause of anaemia is iron deficiency. Iron is 
very important for production of haemoglobin (found in 
red blood cells), which carries oxygen from the lungs to 
different parts of the body. Since all human cells depend 
on oxygen for survival, anaemia can affect many body 
functions. The haemoglobin level in adolescents should not 
be less than 12 gm/dl.
Common reasons for anaemia among adolescents:
• Insufficient intake of iron, folate and foods rich in 
Vitamin C
• Hookworm infestation
• Loss of blood through menstrual bleeding in 
adolescent girls
• Frequent episodes of malaria/illnesses
Signs and symptoms of anaemia:
• Weakness
• Dizziness
• Fatigue
• Pale skin, palm, tongue, lower 
eyelid, nails, etc.
• Shortness of breath
• Cold hands and feet
• Lack of appetite

How can we 
check our 
haemoglobin 
levels?
You may contact ANM or ASHA didi of your area or visit the 
nearest health facility. 

How can we prevent anaemia?
Anaemia can be prevented if you:
• Eat iron-rich foods. Non-vegetarian foods like meat, 
chicken, eggs are high in iron. Vegetarians could 
have iron-rich foods like spinach, bajra , beans and 
oil seeds like kalonji .
• Take blue Iron and Folic Acid (IFA) tablets weekly 
that are provided in schools and AWCs under WIFS 
Programme. Maintain a gap of at least 30 minutes 
between meals and intake of IFA tablet.
• Do not take tea/coffee with meals or for at least 
one hour after taking iron tablets and meals.
• Eat Vitamin C rich foods such as guava, amla , 
orange, lemon, sprouts to increase iron absorption 
in your body.
• Maintain personal hygiene and sanitation.
• On some days food can be cooked in iron utensils.
• Cook food on slow fire and in covered pans. This helps reduce nutrient loss (such 
as in a pressure cooker).
• Wear footwear to prevent worm infestation; take a course of deworming 
medication in case worm infestation is suspected.
• Prevent breeding of mosquitoes to protect from malaria and other mosquito-
borne diseases.

What is Vitamin 
B12 deficiency 
and its 
consequences?
• Vitamin B12 is crucial for nerve tissue health, brain 
function, and the production of red blood cells. 
Cobalamin is another name for Vitamin B12.
• A deficiency or insufficiency can occur when levels of 
Vitamin B12 become too low to meet the demands 
of the body. This can lead to fatigue, breathlessness, 
numbness, poor balance and memory trouble and can 
even progress to irreversible neurological issues if left 
untreated.

What is Body Mass 
Index?
Body mass index (BMI) is a person’s 
weight in kilograms divided by the 
square of height in metres. BMI is 
an inexpensive and easy screening 
method for weight category - 
underweight, healthy weight, 
overweight, and obesity.
Formula: weight (kg)/[height (m)]^2
With the metric system, the formula for BMI is weight in kilograms divided by height 
in metres squared. Because height is commonly measured in centimetres, divide 
height in centimetres by 100 to obtain height in metres.
Example: Weight = 68 kg, Height = 165 cm (1.65 m)
Calculation: 68 ÷ (1.65)^2 = 24.98



What are the 
risk factors to 
lifestyle health 
conditions?
Lifestyle health conditions also known as non-
communicable health conditions are caused due to risk 
factors associated with changing lifestyles. Adolescents 
and youth in particular, spend a lot of time before 
computers, televisions, on mobile phones and social 
media, which results in a sedentary lifestyle with 
very little physical activity. Adolescents are also easily 
influenced by messages from media and advertising 
to follow a lifestyle that may not always be healthy. 
The key risk factors are unhealthy diet (foods with 
low or no nutritional value) including packaged and 
processed foods, physical inactivity (sedentary lifestyle), 
consumption of tobacco and alcohol.

How does an 
unhealthy diet 
affect one’s 
health?
An unhealthy diet is low on nutrition and high on calories. 
Intake of an unhealthy diet may hamper adolescent growth 
and development and may make adolescents vulnerable to 
many lifestyle diseases.

What diseases 
can one 
acquire due 
to risk factors 
associated 
with lifestyle? 
Most common lifestyle diseases include obesity, diabetes 
(high blood sugar), hypertension (high blood pressure), 
heart disease etc.

What is an unhealthy diet?
An unhealthy diet consists of foods with low 
or no nutritional value. These foods are also 
known as junk food and include items like 
aerated drinks, chocolates, chips, noodles, oily 
food like samosas, food made of processed 
cereals like maida  and packaged foods. Junk 
food is high on the 3Ss (sugar, salt and sour 
tastes), which provide empty calories and 
increase one’s appetite. Therefore, avoid 
overeating and unhealthy snacking.

How can physical activity and 
sports help prevent lifestyle 
health conditions?
Physical exercise is important for both 
adolescent girls and boys. Girls should equally 
be encouraged to participate in outdoor 
games and regular physical exercise. Physical 
activities like sports and exercise help burn 
calories more efficiently and improve muscular strength and blood circulation. The 
key to health is to burn what you eat. If you are consuming more than what you are 
using, you will end up being overweight or obese. Hence, one should try including 
physical exercise or sport like cycling, football, running, swimming etc., to balance 
calorie consumption. 
Exercising for 60 minutes for at least five days in a week is also important.

How does one 
maintain an 
active body 
and mind?
Physical activities like exercise, yoga, dance, martial arts, 
outdoor games like football, basketball, running etc., help 
us build stamina, fight fatigue and obesity and support 
the growth of bones and muscles. They also add to our 
confidence level. One can also explore new games and 
ways to support learning abilities.
One can pursue hobbies like music, poetry or painting 
and keep up with current events by reading the daily 
newspaper and listening to news programmes. These 
activities encourage our thinking and learning abilities, 
keeping us stress free, confident and happy.

How can we help girls engage 
in outdoor games and 
recreational/fun activities?
Many adolescent girls are not allowed 
to participate in outdoor games and 
activities. Elders fear that they are not 
safe outside their homes. This is not good 
for their physical health, self-esteem and 
self- confidence, which are important components of healthy growth. As responsible 
members of the community, we should ensure that girls are not teased or harassed 
physically or verbally. Parents should seek help from community members and police 
to act against the perpetrators. This will contribute to community and government’s 
efforts to make public places safe and friendly for girls. Girls should not feel shy/
afraid to report such incidents to their family members.

What is a 
relationship? 
How do I know if 
a relationship is 
safe for me?
A relationship is a way in which two or more people are 
connected to each other. Relationships can be healthy 
or harmful. 
A healthy relationship is based on trust, mutual respect 
and where both feel safe with each other.
A few more characteristics of healthy relationships are:
• Listens to you and understands you
• Cares about how you feel and what you think
• Is honest with you
• Does not talk behind your back
• Keeps promises made to you
• Encourages you to do your best
• Respects your privacy and personal boundaries

A harmful relationship is a relationship in which there is no 
respect towards each other and one or both the persons 
feel uncomfortable or unsafe.
A few more characteristics of harmful relationships are:
• Uses physical force, although not always, to get you to 
do what he/she wants
• Lies or is dishonest with you
• Gossips or spreads rumours about you
• Forces you to do things that you do not want to do
• Hurts you or people by making fun or calling names

Is it okay for boys to cry or be soft-spoken?
Yes, a boy or a man can cry to vent his feelings. He 
can be soft-spoken or shy as well. Being rude or 
insensitive is not macho. It is normal that some boys 
may have soft voices or like to cook or design; things 
generally linked with girls. Taking on different gender 
roles does not mean that a boy is not male. The same 
is true for girls who are outspoken or like to dress like 
boys or play games more linked with boys. It is wrong 
to label such adolescents as ‘sissy’ or ‘tomboyish’.

What is bullying?
Bullying is when someone hurts another 
person physically or emotionally on purpose 
repeatedly either by word or action. Bullying is 
often something that is done by someone who 
is usually more powerful or is in a position of 
strength such as, someone who is bigger, older, 
richer or more popular. A bully may try to make 
the other person feel uncomfortable or hurt them 
physically either by pushing, hitting and kicking or 
by spreading rumours and teasing them by name-calling.

What is peer 
pressure?
Peer pressure is influence that a peer group, observers 
or individuals exert which encourages others to change 
their attitudes, values or behaviour to conform to the 
group’s norms.

Is peer 
pressure 
always 
negative?
No. It is not always negative. Peer pressure can also be 
positive such as pressure to volunteer for a helpful reason, 
respect elders or excel in academics. You can make a 
difference by creating positive peer pressure, especially 
when you feel negative peer pressure around you.

What can 
be done to 
handle peer 
pressure?
Be assertive and express thoughts, ideas and feelings; 
say ‘No’ without guilt/fear; set your own priorities i.e., 
choosing how you spend your time; asking for what you 
want; being able to stand up for what you believe in.

How do you talk to your peers, 
parents and family to deal with 
pressure?
• Be honest and open when communicating with your 
parents. Tell them that you feel pressurized to do 
things that seem wrong or risky and don’t know how 
to deal with them.
• If you cannot communicate directly with your 
parents, try to communicate with someone in the 
family who understands you, maybe an older sibling, 
uncle, aunt, etc. with whom you have a good relation.

What does it 
mean to have a 
boyfriend or a 
girlfriend?
The words boyfriend and girlfriend are commonly used to 
describe a special relationship. It could be a relationship 
where an adolescent feels attracted to someone and wants 
to spend time with them. In India, under the Protection 
of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act 2012, 
adolescents cannot give permission or consent to anyone 
to touch or look at their private parts and they too cannot 
do the same to anyone else. 

Is it okay 
to have a 
boyfriend or 
girlfriend?
It is unsafe to jump into a relationship without thinking 
or just because an adolescent thinks it might be fun. 
Relationships are different from what is shown in movies, 
so it is best to first think about what they are getting into. 
Sometimes, adolescents may feel pressured to be in this 
relationship, maybe by their friends, or even the other 
person who likes them and wants to be in a relationship 
with them.


What is substance misuse and 
who can (mis)use it?
A drug is a chemical substance which when 
consumed by the body, alters its function 
physically and/or psychologically (excluding 
food and water). It could be a pharmaceutical 
preparation or a naturally occurring substance 
(like bhaang ) used primarily to alter 
the physical and mental functioning of 
an individual.
Types of users:
1. Experimenters: Begin using drugs largely because of peer pressure or curiosity 
and usually confine their use to recreational party settings
2. Compulsive users: Devote considerable time and energy or money into getting 
high, talk incessantly about drug use and become experts on street drugs
Substance misuse: It refers to the excessive use of and dependence on a stimulant, 
depressant, chemical substance, herb (plant) leading to effects that are harmful to 
the individual’s physical and/or mental health or the welfare of others.
Addiction:  Repeated use of substance to the extent that the user (addict) is 
periodically or chronically intoxicated, shows a compulsion to take the preferred 
substance/s, has great difficulty in modifying his/her behaviour and exhibits 
determination to obtain the substance, like bhaang , alcohol, tobacco by any means.

What are the 
symptoms of a 
drug user?
If someone is using drugs, you might notice changes in 
how the person looks or acts. The most obvious sign of 
addiction is the strong need to have a particular drug or 
substance. The adolescent user may lose interest in studies 
and school

What are common mental health problems 
during adolescence?
Anxiety, depression, learning disorders are some of the most 
common ones.

What are the 
symptoms of 
mental health 
issues?
Declining academic performance, high-risk behaviours, 
generalized aches and pains, dizziness, trembling and 
sweating, sleep problems or unexplained tiredness, mood 
swings, sadness are some symptoms.
• Have an unexplained change in personality or attitude 
such as sudden mood swings, irritability and anger
• Have trouble concentrating on work or studies
• Have an unexplained need for money and start stealing 
or selling belongings
• Appear fearful, anxious or suspicious for no reason
• Have tremors, slurred speech or impaired coordination

My friends 
pressurize me 
a lot to indulge 
in substance 
misuse. What 
can I do?
Learn and practise saying ‘No’. Do not feel guilty for 
refusing something that you are forced to do. Good 
friends never force one to do anything one is not 
comfortable with. If there is risk of physical harm in saying 
‘No’, do not hesitate to leave your friend’s group or to take 
the help of elders.

My friends say that tobacco and 
alcohol will make me an adult. Is 
this true?
No. To be an adult you should be able to take 
responsibility for your actions. Under the influence 
of alcohol no one is able to do so.

How one can 
get rid of 
the habit of 
using harmful 
substances?
One may contact AFHC or school counsellors and school 
teachers. There are helpline numbers also to support 
quitting. 
Helpline numbers - National Tobacco Quit Line Services 
(NTQLS) - 1800 112 356 (TOLL FREE)

What are the commonly known and used substances and 
their short-term and long-term effects?
1. Substance: Alcohol. 
It is another commonly 
used drug made 
through fermentation 
of fruits and/or grains.
It is a depressant that 
slows down the activity 
of the central nervous 
system.
Short-Term Effects:
At first, the person feels 
relaxed and less inhibited 
but gradually the person’s 
reflexes become slower. 
The person may experience 
mood changes.
Long-Term Effects: 
 A person who drinks 
heavily on a regular basis 
may develop:
•  Inflamed stomach or 
pancreas
•  Severe damage to the 
liver.

2. Substance: Tobacco. 
It consists of crushed 
and dried leaves of the 
tobacco plant.
It is one of the most 
commonly used drugs.
Forms of tobacco: 
Cigarettes, smokes, 
sticks, butts, gutka, 
beedi, hookah.
Short-Term Effects:
If the person drinks a large 
amount of alcohol on a 
single occasion (binge 
drinking), the respiratory 
system may slow down or 
even stop, causing death 
(acute alcohol poisoning). 
Hangover may occur. 
(Severe discomfort in 
the form of headache, 
low blood sugar levels, 
dehydration and irritation 
of the lining of the digestive 
system occurs the next day).
Long-Term Effects: 
• Certain cancers of the 
gastrointestinal tract
• Heart disease, high 
blood pressure
• Brain and nerve damage
Repeated use of alcohol 
makes the user periodically 
or chronically intoxicated 
and the user has great 
difficulty in modifying his/
her behaviour and exhibits 
determination to obtain 
the substance.

What are the 
other harmful 
substances?
Marijuana, hashish, ganja, charas, bhaang,  weed/pot, 
other edible cannabinoids, opium, heroin/ afeem/smack /
brown sugar, buprenorphine, codeine, petrol/kerosene, 
paints, adhesives, varnishes, dry cleaning agents, nail 
polish removers, typewriter and correction fluids, etc.

What are the common reasons for 
stress during adolescence?
Adolescence is a stressful phase for many. The reasons 
could be any of the following: fear of exams and career 
plans, concerns about physical changes, falling in love, 
getting admission in a good school/college, pressure 
by employers, pressure by friends, unfair behaviour 
of elders, risk of violence etc., and trying to maintain good relations with everyone 
during this process.

How can 
we resolve 
problems?
Problem solving enables a person to deal with them 
constructively in his/her life. Problems left unresolved can 
cause mental stress and can affect one’s body with fatigue, 
headaches etc. In such situations it is better to try and 
resolve the issues by talking to different people like PEs, 
parents, relatives, doctor, teacher, social worker or an elder 
member of the community.


What are 
healthy ways 
to manage 
stress?
• Manage your time, identify your strengths and 
limitations, say ‘No’ to pressures and avoid topics that 
can lead to arguments and stress.
• Alter stress situations by being assertive, expressing 
your feelings rather than bottling them up.
• Engage in fun activities that help in dispelling stress 
such as music, sports, dance, yoga etc. 
• Take help from friends, parents, teachers or 
other elders. 

What are 
conflicts and 
why do they 
occur?Conflict refers to some form of disagreement arising 
within a group when the beliefs or actions of one or more 
members of the group are either resisted or unacceptable 
to one or more members of the same group. Conflict 
is a natural part of our lives and very common during 
adolescence, as adolescents think differently and have 
different perspectives.

What 
are some 
peaceful ways 
to resolve a 
conflict?
• Stop the argument when you feel you are getting angry 
and may say something that you will regret later.
• Stay calm and take deep breaths.
• Listen to the other person’s point of view.
• Look for a compromise; think of possible solutions that 
satisfy both sides. Remember compromise is not a win-
win situation always.
• Ask someone else to help (teacher, parents, other 
friends, etc.).


What is anger?
• If conflict is left unsettled it causes anger.
• Anger is a negative emotion that can be managed in 
two ways: bottling it up inside or letting it out.
• It is important to acknowledge, accept, manage and 
appropriately express feelings rather than being 
overwhelmed by their strength.
• When anger comes out, it can harm oneself, 
damage friendships, interfere with learning, disturb 
family relationships and limit participation in group 
activities/team work.

I feel like 
committing 
suicide at 
times. What 
can I do in such 
situations?
• Suicide is not a safe way to express anger, sadness, fear, 
embarrassment or anything else you could be feeling. 
You may feel that there is no solution to the problem 
you are facing and the only way out is by ending your 
life. Remember that there is no single solution to any 
problem, there are many solutions.
• You can seek help from helpful adults, talk to them 
about what is troubling you. Your safety and your life 
are of prime importance. You can also call on some 
helpline numbers in India. NIMHANS Helpline Toll-free 
number: 080 – 4611 0007

What are the signs of Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)?
Symptoms in Males: 
Remember, in case of unprotected 
sexual intercourse, get yourself tested. 
You need not wait for symptoms to 
appear.
Common symptoms are:
• Discharge from penis (green, yellow, 
pus-like)
• Pain or burning during urination
• Swollen and painful glands/lymph 
nodes in the groin; blisters and open 
sores (ulcers) in the genital area
• Warts in the genital area
• Rashes on limbs
• Itching or tingling sensation in the 
genital area
• Sores in the mouth
• Heaviness and discomfort 
in testicles
There are no symptoms for HIV 
infection, it can only be screened for and 
confirmed through a test.
Symptoms in Females:
Remember, in case of unprotected 
sexual intercourse, get yourself tested. 
You need not wait for symptoms to 
appear.
Common symptoms are:
• Irregular bleeding
• Constant lower abdominal/pelvic 
pain
• Abnormal vaginal discharges (white, 
yellow, green, frothy, bubbly, curd-
like, pus-like and odorous)
• Swelling and/or itching of the vagina
• Burning sensation during urination
• Sores on genital parts
• Painful or difficult intercourse
The infection in women may be some 
times asymptomatic until much later.
There are no symptoms for HIV 
infection, it can only be screened 
for and confirmed through a test.


What are the 
consequences 
of leaving STIs 
untreated?
Untreated STIs can lead to some serious health 
consequences including pelvic inflammatory disease 
(PID), infertility and even cancer. They can also lead to 
complications during pregnancy and in newborns and 
death in case of syphilis. STIs like HIV cannot be treated but 
can be managed on timely diagnosis.


How does one 
get infected 
by RTI, STI or 
HIV?Reproductive Tract Infections (RTIs) may occur either due 
to poor personal hygiene or unprotected sexual contact. 
Not all RTIs are sexually transmitted. Some infections 
are due to poor sanitation and hygiene that includes 
using unclean toilets, sanitary pads, improper cleaning of 
genitalia during daily bath and for girls especially during 
menstruation or unsafe abortion.
Remember, even the first unprotected sexual encounter 
can lead to STIs and HIV.

What is HIV and what is AIDS?
HIV: HIV stands for Human Immunodeficiency 
Virus (HIV) that causes AIDS. HIV attacks 
the body’s immune system which helps 
the body fight off infections and other 
diseases. Over a period of time, HIV 
gradually destroys this ability of the 
body, making people more susceptible 
to different infections like tuberculosis 
and diarrhoea but with weak immunity 
to fight them.
H = Human (only found in humans)
I = Immunodeficiency (weakens the 
immune system)
V = Virus (a type of germ)
AIDS: Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
(AIDS) is the stage wherein HIV infection 
brings the immunity of the body down 
to a very low level, when an infected 
person becomes susceptible to different 
minor but possibly fatal serious 
infections.
A = Acquired (to get something that you 
are not born with)
I = Immuno (the body’s defense system, 
which provides protection from 
infections)
D = Deficiency (a defect or weakness, 
lack of something)
S = Syndrome (a group of signs and 
symptoms in a disease)

Does HIV kill a 
person?
HIV does not kill a person but leads to a condition 
wherein body immunity becomes extremely low and 
in such conditions the body is not able to fight against 
the infection. This condition is called ‘AIDS’. But with 
timely treatment known as Antiretroviral Therapy (ART), 
nutritious food, physical exercise, healthy lifestyle and 
positive attitude towards healthy living one can delay AIDS.

What are the different modes of transmission of HIV?
Modes of transmission: 
- Unprotected vaginal 
and/or anal sex 
with an HIV infected 
partner
- Transfusion of HIV 
infected blood and 
blood products, 
- Sharing needles 
with HIV infected 
drug users
- From parents living 
with HIV to their 
unborn child

HIV is NOT transmitted through
- Hugging 
- Sneezing
- Being bitten by 
a mosquito
- Shaking 
hands
- Using public 
toilets
- Sharing or eating food 
in same utensils, or 
using objects handled 
by people with HIV
- Spending time in the 
same house, school 
or public place with a 
person who has HIV 
infection

How can HIV 
infection be 
prevented?
HIV infection can be prevented through:
• Correct and regular use of condoms
• Being faithful to partner
• Abstinence from sexual intercourse (or sexual contact) 
without condom
• Transfusion of blood obtained from authorized 
blood banks
• Use of disposable syringes and needles
• Not sharing injecting equipment during drug use
• HIV positive pregnant women can prevent transmission 
to their unborn child by undertaking Prevention of 
Parent to Child Transmission (PPTCT) therapy.

What are the 
signs and 
symptoms of 
HIV infection?
A person does not know about HIV infection without 
getting tested. 

How does 
pregnancy 
happen?
Pregnancy happens when a male and female have 
sexual intercourse. During intercourse, the mature egg is 
fertilized by a sperm cell. The fertilized egg then travels 
down the fallopian tube into the uterus. This is conception 
and marks the beginning of pregnancy.
When pregnancy happens, a woman’s menstruation stops 
as the uterus has the fertilized egg implanted in it.

What is 
contraception?
Contraception is a method by which pregnancy/conception 
is prevented.

Why should 
a couple use 
contraception?
Couples should adopt contraception to prevent unwanted 
pregnancies and to plan their family.

Who should 
be responsible 
for practising 
contraception: 
man or 
woman?
Both partners need to mutually decide on the method of 
contraception considering the suitability, advantages, risks 
associated and convenience for the user. Contraception is 
not the sole responsibility of the female partner.

What are 
the different 
contraceptive 
methods for 
men?
The contraceptive methods available for men are 
condoms, which are simple and easy to use and also 
provide protection against RTI/STI and HIV infection.


What are the different contraceptive 
methods for women?
Oral Contraceptive Pills (OCPs) such as Mala D, Chhaya, 
Intrauterine Devices such as Copper T, Injectable 
contraceptives such as Antara are available at government 
hospitals. Other methods such as female condoms are 
available in the market.

What is 
emergency 
contraception?
Emergency contraception is a way to prevent pregnancy 
within 72 hours of unprotected sex.
Unprotected sex may happen due to non-use of any 
contraceptive device, incorrect use of condom, tearing of 
condom, sex under the influence of alcohol and drugs and 
in cases of forced sex, sexual violence/assault (date rape, 
sexual abuse etc.). Emergency contraceptive pills (ECPs) 
are available with the ASHA didi and at all government 
health facilities. It should be taken as soon as possible 
after unprotected sex – and definitely within 72 hours. 
Consuming this pill after 72 hours may not prevent 
pregnancy.
Note: ECP is not to be consumed on a regular basis or as 
an OCP .

What are 
the best 
contraceptive 
methods for 
adolescents and 
young couples?
Condoms: Condoms are available for both men and 
women, but more commonly and at cheaper price for men.
• A male condom is a sheath or covering made to fit over 
a man’s erect penis. Most commonly available brand in 
the public health system is ‘Nirodh’. A condom prevents 
semen (carrying sperms) from entering the vagina and 
hence prevents fertilization of the ovum by the sperm.
• A female condom is closed at one end and is inserted 
into the vagina with the help of fingers with the open 
end outside the vagina. This creates a physical barrier 
for the semen ejaculated into the vagina from coming in 
contact with the ovum.
Both male and female condoms also provide protection 
against STIs including HIV. This makes it the most suitable 
contraceptive for adolescents and young couples. But 
condoms need to be used correctly and consistently.
54• Hormonal contraceptive pills: OCPs are a combination of hormones that can be 
taken every day to prevent ovulation in women. Some of the commonly available 
OCPs are Mala-D, Mala-N. Consistent regular use is necessary for its success.
Other methods (only for those with a child):
• Intra-uterine contraceptive device (IUCD): can be placed inside the uterus of 
a woman to prevent the fertilization of egg. This method is not suggested for 
unmarried women and those without any children.
•  Chhaya, a non-hormonal pill, is a safe and effective method and can be given to 
breastfeeding mothers.
•  Antara, an injectable contraceptive, is a safe and effective method of contraception 
for maintaining spacing between pregnancies.

What are 
safe sexual 
practices?
Safe sexual practices are those where there is no or minimum 
risk of unwanted pregnancy or transmission of infections 
through sexual route. This includes:
• Masturbation - Commonly understood as self-stimulation 
of sexual organs with hands for sexual pleasure. It may 
be practised alone or with a partner. There is no scientific 
evidence for its negative effect on health or fertility 
etc. However, among adolescents, preoccupation with 
masturbation may slow down other activities like study, 
play, social interaction etc.
• Holding hands, touching, kissing, cuddling are some safe 
ways to show affection and love.
• Correct and consistent use of condom (condom provides 
triple protection – from unwanted pregnancy, STI and HIV).
• Use of suitable contraceptive method.
• Being faithful to partner.
• Abstinence from sex (delay sexual debut).

What is safe 
abortion or 
MTP?
In India, Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) has been 
legalized through the MTP Act which came into force in 
1972. Any woman above 18 years of age, irrespective of 
marital status, can opt for an abortion. In case of minors 
(below 18 years of age), a written consent from parents 
or guardian is necessary. Safe abortion is the procedure 
performed by certified doctors in a certified clinical or 
hospital setting only (authorized under the provisions 
of the MTP Act). It is legal in India. The MTP Act gives 
well-specified grounds for abortion that include failure of 
contraception, pregnancy due to sexual violence like rape, 
if continuation of pregnancy poses a threat to the life of 
a woman, risk to physical health and mental trauma to 
woman, or when there is a substantial risk that the child, if 
born, would suffer from deformities and diseases. 
55The MTP (Amendment) Act, 2021 came into force with effect from 24th September 
2021. This Act amends the MTP Act 1971 ('MTP Act') which regulates the conditions 
under which medical termination of pregnancy can be pursued. It allows abortion to 
be done on the advice of one doctor up to 20 weeks, and two doctors in the case of 
certain categories of women between 20 and 24 weeks. State-level Medical Boards 
decide if a pregnancy may be terminated after 24 weeks in cases of substantial 
foetal abnormalities.

When is 
abortion 
unsafe?
An abortion is unsafe when done at uncertified clinics 
or hospitals and by an untrained person/doctor and it 
has serious risks like partial abortion, damage to internal 
organs, excessive bleeding and may prove fatal as well.

What are 
the different 
methods to 
terminate a 
pregnancy?
Pregnancy can be terminated surgically or non-surgically 
depending on the gestation of the pregnancy, but under 
the strict supervision of a trained and certified doctor.

When can a woman 
have the next 
pregnancy after 
a miscarriage or 
induced abortion?
The recommended minimum interval before the 
next pregnancy is six months. This will help reduce 
risks of adverse effects on the mother and child.

When is 
abortion 
illegal?
Abortion can be illegal if:
• Performed by an untrained and uncertified person
• Performed in an uncertified clinic or hospital. GoI has 
certified select clinics and hospitals based on availability 
of necessary infrastructure to provide safe 
abortion services 
• Duration of pregnancy is above the permitted 20 weeks 
of gestation or without the opinion of a second doctor if 
gestation period is between 20 and 24 weeks
• It is conducted based on the sex of the foetus (female 
foeticide)
Also, pregnancy can be terminated only through government-approved clinical 
methods. Termination of pregnancy through non-clinical methods (like those 
performed at home, using force etc.) is illegal as it can jeopardize the health of the 
woman and may even cause excessive haemorrhage and damage to internal organs, 
such as puncturing or tearing of the uterus. Long-term complications include chronic 
pain, PID and infertility.
Note: Termination of pregnancy after determining the sex of the child is a criminal 
offence on the part of both the doctor performing and the couple and their family 
members supporting such an act.

Is violence 
common 
amongst 
adolescents?
Violence can lead to more serious consequences for the 
victims than the perpetrators. If the victim is a girl, she is 
not allowed to go out of the house, forced to discontinue 
studies and often deprived of available opportunities for 
skill building and independence. Violence not only harms 
the present of the victim but also influences his/her future. 

What can be the effects of 
violence? 
Any form of physical, verbal or sexual abuse is 
violence.
Physical:  An act which harms an adolescent 
physically; it can be in the form of punching, 
kicking, shoving, beating, slapping, 
ear/hand twisting.
Verbal: An act to harm a child by using offensive words, slang, embarrassing a child 
in front of classmates, narrating sexual jokes in front of someone, using insulting 
language. It can be in the form of abusive language a husband uses against his wife 
or parents against their children. It can also be in the form of whistling, passing lewd 
remarks against anyone, especially girls.
Emotional:  Anything which hurts a child emotionally – insults, humiliations, threats, 
lack of affection, bias – is emotional violence which can lead to mental stress.
Sexual:  Pressurizing or forcing someone to perform sexual acts (can range from 
kissing to penetrative sex) against his/her will or consent. It can be in the form of 
brushing past girls, touching them inappropriately, undressing in front of a child, 
asking a child to undress in front of an adult, etc.

What should 
a child who 
has faced 
violence do?
A child who has faced any form of violence should not 
feel ashamed, scared or isolated but should be supported 
in his/her fight for justice. The child must seek support 
from parents/teachers or other family members in such 
a situation. CHILDLINE (telephone no. 1098) stands for a 
friendly didi or a sympathetic bhaiya  who is always there 
for vulnerable children 24 hours of the day, 365 days of 
the year.

What is 
Gender-Based 
Violence 
(GBV)? 
Who 
can be the 
victims?GBV is a term for any harmful act that is done against 
a person’s will, which is based on gender differences 
between males and females. While GBV is usually 
targeted at girls and women, boys and men may also be 
victims of GBV. 

What are 
the different 
forms of 
GBV?
Some of the commonly heard forms of GBV in our country 
are female foeticide, female infanticide, honour killing, 
child/forced marriage, kidnapping for marriage, domestic 
violence, eve teasing, stalking, molestation and rape 
(forced sex).

What are 
the common 
injuries among 
adolescents?
Road traffic crashes, drowning, falls, burns, poisoning, work 
related injuries, animal bites constitute major threats of 
survival for children and adolescents worldwide.

How to 
prevent 
injuries?
• Do not come under peer pressure to perform any risky 
activities like rash driving or doing stunts etc.
• Use seat belts and bicycle and motorcycle helmets,
• Avoid alcohol and drugs etc.
• Use safety equipment in sports and leisure activities
• Protect yourself at work place
• Be careful while passing through forest or bushy areas 
to prevent snake bite or getting bitten by an animal
• Immediately contact the nearest health centre, if 
injured

What can we 
do if we spot a 
victim of GBV?
Victims of GBV need to be immediately taken to the 
nearest medical/health centre for first aid, treatment 
and counselling support. Most of the health centres 
have good referral contacts to ensure legal aid, care and 
support to the victim/survivor. 

What is child sexual abuse?
Sexual abuse includes touching, looking at 
or talking about children’s private parts. 
Sexual abuse can happen to any child.
Touching involves:
• Touching private parts
• Touching areas surrounding private 
parts
• Rubbing their body against children in a 
sexual way
• Trying to kiss children on their mouth
• Asking children to do any of these with them or others
Looking involves:
• Showing their private parts
• Looking at your private parts
• Showing photos or videos with sexual activities
• Clicking photos of children’s private parts
• Making videos where children’s private parts can be seen
Talking includes:
• Using sexual language or jokes that talk about sexual activities or private parts 
• Passing sexual comments or comments on your or someone else’s private parts
Sometimes people may do things accidentally. For example, someone touched 
your buttocks while playing or opened the door while you were changing clothes. 
Even though these things happened accidentally, it is okay if you felt unsafe or 
uncomfortable. You can still let the other person know that you do not like it and do 
not want it to happen again. So, whether an incident is sexual abuse or not, when 
you feel uncomfortable or unsafe you need to talk about it with your helping adults.

What can I do 
if someone 
is trying to 
sexually  
abuse me?
In such a situation you can say no or refuse assertively and 
get away from the unsafe situation or place.
Then you can go and tell a helping adult as soon as 
possible. You may also feel comfortable telling a friend or 
someone of your own age and that is alright. However, 
after that, talk to an adult, as they are in a better position 
to help you.

Does sexual 
abuse happen 
only with girls 
and not boys?
Sexual abuse can happen to both boys and girls. In fact, the 
number of girls abused and the number of boys abused in 
our country is almost the same.

What if being 
assertive or saying no 
does not help? Is it 
okay to be aggressive? 
What else can I do?
Assertive behaviour is usually helpful. 
However, if they still keep troubling you, you 
can even scream for help. As the last option, 
you can use aggressive behaviour like pushing 
rather than hitting when nothing else is 
working out.

If I share about the 
sexual abuse I have 
experienced then 
it will bring shame 
upon me and my 
family. What can I 
do in this situation?
It is never your fault if someone has sexually 
abused you. No matter what the people 
around you say, always keep in mind that you 
are not to be blamed for what someone else 
did. It is not your fault so there is no need for 
you to feel guilty or worry about your family’s 
name and reputation.
Remember when you tell adults about this, 
it might at first be a shock to them, so be 
prepared and give them time to relax. If you 
do not tell them, they cannot know and so 
they cannot help. 

How do 
I know if 
someone 
is planning 
to sexually 
abuse me?
It can be difficult to understand if someone is sexually 
abusing you or is planning to sexually abuse you. People 
who sexually abuse children can be a known person or 
a stranger. A stranger may try to trick children by either 
asking for some help or assistance in finding an address 
or trying to help the child. They may even offer something 
like chocolates or allowing to play with their pet animal or 
something else they like. Known people can sometimes 
trick children and create a relationship with them or 
their families.
Tricking is usually a characteristic of a harmful relationship, 
as there is no honesty in it. The way in which they 
form the relationship is the same way as anyone forms 
a relationship. This makes it difficult for children to 
understand what this person wants from the relationship. 
As soon as you realize what they are doing or feel 
uncomfortable, try your best to ask for help.

What law is there to support us if 
someone sexually abuses us?
GoI has created a law called POCSO to support children 
in case someone sexually abuses them. You can call on 
police helpline numbers - 100 or 112. You can also call on 
CHILDLINE helpline number 1098 or contact the Counsellor 
at the AFHC and seek assistance. 

How can I help a friend who is 
experiencing sexual abuse?
Help your friend talk to an adult who can help: 
like parents, teachers, police, siblings or 
 friends (above 18).
Do not promise to keep it a secret or not tell anyone. 
You will need to talk to a helpful adult and ask for help. 
Keeping this in mind you can say to your friend: “I cannot make a promise to keep it 
a secret, but I will only tell someone to get help for you.” 
Let your friend know that the abuse is not their fault. Children who experience 
sexual abuse often feel they have done something wrong. 
Do not let the information about the sexual abuse spread all over the school, or 
tuitions, or among friend circles. Talk to a helpful adult to help you and your friend.

What if I go to 
an adult to ask 
for help and 
he/she refuses 
to help me?
It is quite possible that a helpful adult may refuse to 
help you for some reason. In such situation, you can go 
to another helpful adult to ask for help. You can call on 
police helpline numbers - 100 or 112. You can also call on 
CHILDLINE helpline number 1098 or contact the Counsellor 
at the AFHC and seek assistance.

Are human 
rights 
applicable to 
adolescents? 
What are 
the bodies 
that ensure 
adolescent 
rights? 
All human rights are applicable to adolescents as to any 
adult. The Constitution of India has a special provision 
to ensure survival, protection, development, health and 
happiness of its children. Some of the rights entitlement 
bodies include - National Commission for Protection of Child 
Rights (NCPCR) an independent body to take measures 
to protect the rights of children across the country; the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) of United Nations 
which means that the GoI and our State Governments are 
committed to ensure the Rights of Children as stated in 
the CRC; and Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW).

What are the six Fundamental Rights 
that every Indian child is entitled to?
The Constitution of India has provided six Fundamental 
Rights to every child of the country. These are:
• The right to equality
• The right to freedom
• The right to freedom from exploitation
• The right to freedom of religion
• Cultural and educational rights
• The right to constitutional remedies

What are the key features of 
the AFHS that adolescents 
are entitled to?
The key features of the AFHS are:
• Separate room in the existing clinic 
for adolescents with a separate 
waiting area
• Accessible location
• Adolescent friendly timings
• Dedicated trained service provider
• Privacy to adolescents when sharing 
their concerns with ANM/doctor/
counsellor
• Doctors/counsellor and other staff not to discriminate, judge adolescents on the 
basis of:
	-- the act that caused the medical condition 
	-- the information they want to seek about their own body or sexual activities
	-- asking for contraceptives


How can we 
maintain body 
hygiene?
Daily bath is a very important routine. One should 
have a full body bath daily with a gentle soap/
cleanser and include cleaning of hair and genital 
area. Head bath with soap/shampoo or home-
based cleanser is necessary at least three times 
a week to prevent dandruff and other scalp 
infections. One can also use home-based cleansers 
available in our kitchen such as wheat flour husk, 
besan  mixed with dahi  or plain water with a little 
turmeric. There are also special kinds of clay (locally 
known as multani mitti ) that are easily available. 
These home remedies not only clean the body and 
hair but also maintain their softness and 
glow. During daily bath, special care should be 
taken to clean genital area with plain water or 
gentle cleanser.

Why is it important to wash our 
hands with soap and keep our 
nails clean?
While we take care of our body and looks, 
it is equally important to wash our hands 
properly every time we use the toilet and 
before handling eatables. Hand washing with 
soap substantially reduces the risk of infections 
causing diarrhoea, jaundice, typhoid and polio 
in childhood. Nails should be cut; if one has 
long nails, they should be cleaned every time during hand 
wash to remove any dirt or 
infection underneath.

How do poor 
community 
hygiene and 
environmental 
conditions 
cause 
illnesses?
Defecation in the open, improper hand washing and 
poor waste disposal are the root causes of water-borne 
infections and diseases like diarrhoea, intestinal parasites 
and malaria and air-borne infections like pneumonia and 
tuberculosis. Smoke from factories and vehicles has raised 
levels of harmful pollutants in the air. Bronchial asthma and 
other respiratory conditions are on the rise among children 
and adolescents.

How can adolescents help 
in community health and 
sanitation?
• Stop defecation in the open and 
encourage use of toilets and hand 
washing with soap. Encourage 
construction of sanitary latrines 
at home.
• Demand separate toilets for boys and 
girls in schools.
Who can I contact?
Name Contact No.
• Educate people to keep toilets and public utilities clean and sanitized.
• Create awareness that unclean water should pass through a separate 
pipe/channel.
• Separate biodegradable (easily decomposed like vegetables, food products etc.) 
from non-biodegradable waste (that do not decompose but can be recycled like 
paper, plastic, glass etc.)
• Encourage hygienic disposal of menstrual product.

What is the 
meaning of 
sexting? Is it 
sexual abuse?
Sexting (Sex+texting) means receiving or sending sexual 
text messages, photos or videos using mobile phones, 
laptops, tablets or smart phones where either private parts 
can be seen or being spoken of. Once a sext (sex+text) is 
sent, there is no way of getting it back and can be misused 
by the person it has been sent to. It could spread over the 
internet too. Sexting is sexual abuse and illegal especially 
if the messages, photos and videos are of someone below 
18 years of age. Even if children below the age of 18 share 
such information with each other it is sexual abuse.
If you ever receive a sext whether from a friend, a cousin, 
a relative or from your girlfriend or boyfriend, let them 
know that it is not alright to send such messages, photos 
or videos. Do not share it with others. Talk to your helpful 
adult about it and seek help.

 What is cyberbullying?
 Cyberbullying is another form of bullying or harassment 
that takes place using electronic technology. It can be done 
by devices such as cell phones, computers, and tablets 
as well as on social media sites, text messages, chats, 
and websites. Sharing or posting embarrassing photos 
or videos of children without permission to make fun of 
them, posting or writing something insulting about a child 
on social media like WhatsApp, Facebook or Instagram are 
examples of cyberbullying. Sexual bullying or sexual abuse 
too can happen through cyberbullying.

Why do people 
say the internet 
is unsafe?
The internet is a huge platform loaded with lots of 
information on a variety of things. It can be helpful if used 
properly. You can learn many new skills, gain a wide range of 
knowledge and even boost healthy development. However, 
it is important to be careful while using the internet. The 
accuracy of the information depends a lot on the source 
of the information. If you get the information from an 
untrusted source, it is very likely that the information you 
gather might be wrong and may cause harm.

How can I create 
a password that 
people cannot 
guess or figure 
out?
Here are a few factors you can keep in mind while 
creating a password:
• Make the password at least 8-12 characters long. 
The longer the password the better. Depending on 
the requirement of the website you are signing in to, 
include numbers, symbols, capital letters and small 
letters. For example, TfhIeliw613FS. Rw$4pw. You 
7676can replace some letters with a number or a special 
character, for example, 0 (zero) for O, $ for S, 4 for A, 
3 for E, 8 for G, 7 for L, 1 or ! for I, 9 for P . You can use 
this very creatively to make your password.
• Do not let the web browser on your phone or computer 
like Chrome or UC browser (Universal Control Browser) or 
Internet Explorer or Mozilla Firefox save the password.
• Never share your password with anyone. Do not write 
your passwords in places where it is easy for anyone 
to find.
• Do not use one password for everything. Use different 
passwords for different websites.
• When you use computers at a cybercafe make sure you 
logout before you get up.

Is it safe to accept the friend 
request of strangers?
Before you accept friend requests from strangers 
there are a few things you need to keep in mind. 
There is a possibility that the person might be 
someone older than you and has written the 
wrong age. People can create fake profiles; they 
may share false information about themselves.
They may say that they only want to be friends 
with you online, they just want to chat with you and want to know you. There is no 
sure way to know if these are their actual plans. They may talk to you in a way that 
shows they understand you. They may try to flatter you by giving false praises. All 
these things can make you feel very happy with yourself and you may even feel that 
this person is a safe person who completely understands you like no one else.
Yet, if someone you became friends with on the internet asks to meet you, it may turn 
out to be unsafe for you. Avoid arranging a face-to-face meeting with someone you 
met online. It is best to even avoid any kind of communication in the form of an audio 
or video call with them.
However, if you still plan to meet them then think of a place that is more public; the 
reason why they want to meet you; taking someone along instead of going alone; 
and about the time you will be meeting them.

Are all online 
challenges 
or games 
unsafe?
All online challenges or games are not unsafe, but some 
are. These unsafe challenges or games at the beginning 
sound fun and safe, as you move ahead, the level of it 
being unsafe increases.
These challenges or games are not just harmful but the 
people who are running or handling them are tricking 
children into joining them and then pressurizing them to 
complete the challenge.

Why am I told 
to not share 
personal 
information on 
the internet? 
How will I 
create a profile 
if I don’t put 
up personal 
information?
To create a profile, you do need to share personal 
information. Be careful with what kind of information 
you are sharing on the internet, how much personal 
information you are sharing and with whom you are 
sharing it. Giving out a lot of personal or very private 
information on the internet to either someone who is 
known or unknown can be unsafe. Therefore, before 
you give out information such as your phone number 
or address you need to think about the possible 
consequences of sharing such information.
Another way of sharing information is by uploading photos 
or videos. You need to be careful when you upload these.


What are 
privacy 
settings and 
what can I 
do to have 
strong privacy 
settings?
Privacy settings are the various settings you can set on 
all the social media websites or apps on which you have 
created your accounts or profiles or logged on. Privacy 
settings control how much information about you can be 
shared on these websites or apps and what information 
you want to share with known and unknown people.
