Frequently Asked Questions by ASHAs 
about 
DMP A: Depot Medroxy Progesterone Acetate
Q1. What is Antara (DMPA) injection?
Injectable contraceptive or DMPA or Antara, 
as it is known in India, is a reversible 
contraception method. Any women of 15-45 
years of age can use this. It is available free 
of cost in government run health centre and 
hospital.
Q2. How do injectables work?
Injectables work by preventing the release of the egg in the woman. If the man’s 
sperm has no egg to meet, the woman cannot get pregnant.
Antara thickens cervical muscles to 
block sperm and suppresses
hormones
responsible for
ovulation.
Q3. What are failure rates of Antara (DMPA) use?
DMPA has a failure rate of 0.3% when the drug is used correctly. It means it can fail 
in about 3 out of 1000 women.
Q4. How often do women have to take the injection?
The injection has to be taken every 3 months or 13 weeks. Can be up to
2 weeks early or 4 weeks late. 
 
Q5. Why do some women like using injectables?
Injectables are safe and work well to prevent pregnancy.
  During the three months, there is nothing more a woman has to do or 
remember.
  It is private – others will not know that a woman is using injectables.
  Monthly bleeding become very light and often stop after a year of use. Monthly 
bleeding resumes when a woman stops getting injections.
  Injectables can be used even when a woman is breastfeeding, starting at 6 weeks 
after the baby is born.
Q6. Do women need to strictly follow the scheduled date?
While receiving the dose of 
DMPA, women should be 
told to come approximately 
3 months later. However, 
women can get late due to 
various reasons.
  Even if the woman goes a few 
days late (maximum of 28 
days late), her next injection 
can be given.
  Similarly, even if she goes a 
few days early, the injection 
can be given upto a maximum 
of 14 days earlier than the scheduled date.
  While in the field, if you meet a woman who is late for her DMPA dose, you 
should inform her that she should try to go back to the clinic, no matter how 
late she is.

Q7. What are the side effects of Antara (DMPA)?
A woman who receives an Antara injection can have the following side effects:
i. Changes in menstrual bleeding patterns including, with DMPA1:
There are menstrual changes for almost all women. For most women, the 
monthly bleedings becomes very light or is the form of spotting, or irregular 
bleeding. In about half the women, periods stop after a year of use. Monthly 
bleeding resumes when a woman stops getting injections.
ii. Delay in return of fertility: On stopping DMPA use, women do not immediately 
become pregnant, it may take 4-6 months longer for them to become pregnant.
iii. Other changes: Some women may also report the following:
Weight gain, Abdominal bloating and discomfort, Headaches, Mood changes, Dizziness, Less sex drive.
Q8. How long does it take to become pregnant after discontinuing Antara (DMPA)?
Woman who discontinue DMPA have to wait for an average 4-6 months longer to 
become pregnant than woman who have used other methods. A woman should not 
be worried if she has not become pregnant after 12 months after stopping use of 
DMPA.
Almost 70% women conceive within the first 12 months following discontinuation of 
DMPA, and 92% conceived within 24 months.3
Q9. Can all women use Antara (DMPA)? Are there any health conditions in which women 
should not use it?
In following conditions DMPA, cannot be used –
  During pregnancy – any women with confirm pregnancy till she delivers or 
pregnancy is terminated
  Up to 6 weeks (42 days) of last delivery
  If a women has some serious health condition, for example, when her BP is very 
high, or in diabetic women who have diabetes for last many years.
Before a woman receives her DMPA injection, a doctor will examine her for all those 
conditions where this injection should not be given before advising Antara injection.
Q10. Can women who have completed their families and do not want more children, receive 
Antara (DMPA) on a long-term basis?
Yes, DMPA is safe and can be used also by women who want a long term method. 
Women need to be counselled on all available contraceptive methods, including 
DMPA. Women should be helped to choose the method they want.
Q11. If a woman wants to get pregnant 2 years after starting Antara (DMPA), when should she 
stop DMPA injections in order to get pregnant in time?
If a woman wants to get pregnant then she should discontinue the Antara (DMPA) 
after 5-6 doses and it will take 4-10 month to get her fertility back.

Q12. Can Antara (DMPA) be given to delay the first childbirth among women who are newly 
married?
Yes, Antara (DMPA) can be given to nulliparous / newly married woman who wants 
to delay first child birth for few years. This is more comfortable for newly married 
women as Antara (DMPA) injection has to be given once in 3 months.
Q13. For how long can a woman safely use Antara (DMPA)?
It can be used as long as women or client want to use and want to avoid pregnancy. 
There is no restriction on the duration of its use.
Q14. Does Antara (DMPA) make women infertile?
No. Antara (DMPA) is reversible contraceptive method and it never makes any woman 
infertile. The average time of return of fertility is 10 months.
Q15. Can Antara (DMPA) be given to women in the immediate postpartum period (who have 
delivered in the last 48 hours)?
No. Antara (DMPA) cannot be given up to 6 weeks postpartum in breastfeeding 
woman. It can only be started at 6 weeks (42 days) after delivery.
For non-breastfeeding woman it can be started even before 42 days, however, any 
contraception for such women should be based on woman’s fertility desires and 
proper counselling.
Q16. If a woman is switching from oral pills to Antara (DMPA), can she switch mid-cycle or 
should she wait till start of her next period?
She can start using Antara (DMPA) immediately, no need to wait for her next monthly 
bleeding. Send her to nearest health centre if she wants to switch to Antara (DMPA) 
from oral pills.
Q17. Can ASHAs give Antara (DMPA)?
No. But she can counsel women on Antara (DMPA), remind user for timely admin-
istration of subsequent injection and provide them advise if they have any questions 
related to Antara (DMPA) use.
Q18. Can staff nurses or ANMs give DMPA?
As per the guidelines of ministry of health in India, it is recommended that the first 
dose of DMPA injection to be administered under the guidance of a trained MBBS 
doctor after proper screening. Subsequent injections may be administered by trained 
ANM or Staff nurse.
Q19. Does use of Antara (DMPA) affect sexual function?
Generally, no. Most women do not have any changes in their sexual function. 
However, a few women may have less sex drive.
Q20. Can anaemic women take Antara (DMPA)?
Antara (DMPA) has non contraceptive benefits as well. It may help in preventing iron 
deficiency anaemia. Antara (DMPA) hormone causes less or no bleeding which then 
helps to prevent iron deficiency anaemia. Hence it is a good method for anaemic 
women.
Q21. What examination is needed for a woman who wants Antara (DMPA)?
A woman who wants to start Antara (DMPA) needs to have check-up by a doctor, 
that includes asking a few questions about her health, general examination including 
blood pressure check-up, abdominal examination.
A pelvic (vaginal) examination is generally not necessary.
Q22. If a woman wants to use DMPA, without informing her husband or family, can she get 
Antara (DMPA)?
Like any other contraceptive, it’s a woman decision to use a contraceptive method. 
No family member is required to give consent for use of DMPA.
Q23. Can illiterate women use Antara (DMPA)?
Yes. Any woman who is interested in using DMPA can use it, provided she is found 
to be medically eligible to use it. Before starting DMPA, all women should be given 
proper counselling regarding DMPA, timing of repeat injection, and side effects.
Q24. What should I do if I meet a woman in the community who has not returned for second 
dose or subsequent dose?
If you a meet a woman who has not returned for her second dose, assess the 
following:
a. whether she is aware of the need to return for repeat dose,
b. whether she has any side effects that concern her and whether she wants to 
discontinue
If she wants to discontinue DMPA, inquire whether she wishes to start 
anther contraceptive and ask her to visit a health centre
If she wishes to continue DMPA, ask her to go back to the health centre.
Q25. What should I do if a client using Antara is late for the next DMPA injection?
 Inform the woman that she should try to go on time for the next injection.
  However, if she is unable to go on the scheduled date as per client card is not 
possible, she can go upto 28 days late or 14 days early from the scheduled date 
for an injection.
Q26. What should an ASHA do if a client is more than 28 days late (more than 4 months have 
passed since the date of last injection)?
If more than 4 months have passed since the last injection, then advise the woman to 
start using another contraceptive method (e.g. condoms) and ask her to immediately 
visit the health centre.
Q27. If a woman who is breastfeeding her baby, uses DMPA, does it affect quantity and quality 
of breast milk?
Injectable contraceptives can be started 6 weeks (42 days) after delivery. DMPA is safe 
for both the mother and the baby, and does not affect the quality and quantity of 
milk production. It is a good choice for a breastfeeding mothers.
Q28. If a woman does not have monthly bleeding while using DMPA, does this mean that she 
is pregnant or she has achieved menopause?
No, about half the women using DMPA will not have their monthly periods. This 
amenorrhea (absence of periods) is not related to pregnancy or menopause.
Q29. What advice should I give in cases of amenorrhea?
  Reassure the client that amenorrhea is a common side effect and is not harmful.
  However, if she is not satisfied then you may offer her pregnancy test (by 
Nishchay kit) to rule out pregnancy.
  If she is still not satisfied, refer her to nearest health centre to consult ANM or 
Medical Officer.
Q30. What advice should I give if a woman using DMPA complains of irregular periods or 
spotting?
  If a client complains of irregular light periods/spotting, reassure her that spotting 
or irregular bleeding is not harmful and it usually reduces or stops after first few 
months of use.
  If she is not satisfied, accompany her to the health centre
It is essential that before initiation of DMPA, a client is provided proper counselling 
on likely side effects.
Q31. Does DMPA causes anaemia due to changes in bleeding pattern?
No. Since the bleeding is minimal/no bleeding after three to four months of use, 
it rarely results in anaemia. In fact, anaemia, which is caused by blood loss or iron 
deficiency, is actually prevented by DMPA.7
Q32. Does DMPA causes collection of dirty blood in body due to amenorrhoea?
No, no blood is collected in the uterus when a woman uses DMPA. The lining of 
uterus is thinned, that’s why the menstrual bleeding is reduced or stopped.
Q33. What check-up is needed for starting DMPA?
Before providing DMPA, it is important to assess her medical eligibility using an 
eligibility checklist or MEC wheel. Most of the time, the eligibility can be assessed by 
asking a set of questions and carrying out a blood pressure measurement. 
DMPA can be provided to women without doing unnecessary procedures. Women 
can begin DMPA: 
  Without a pelvic examination
  Without breast examination
  Without blood test or any other routine lab tests
  Without a pregnancy test5
Q34. Do clients need to stop using DMPA and have a ‘rest’ period after several injections?
There is no need for rest period with DMPA. There is no limit to the number of 
years DMPA can be continuously used. Among healthy women it can be given until 
menopause, when contraception is no longer needed.6
Q35. What is the subcutaneous DMPA? 
There is another type of injectable contraceptive DMPA, which is meant to be given 
below skin but not in muscle. It has a thinner and shorter needle, and the medicine 
is already filled in the device. Like the intramuscular DMPA (IM DMPA), this too 
works for 3 months. 

Q36. Can Subcutaneous MPA be administered to those women who cannot be given IM-DMPA 
and vice-versa?
No, SC-DMPA cannot be administered to those women who are not eligible to take 
MPA-IM and vice versa. Contraindications for use of both are the same.7
Q37. Can a woman switch between Intramuscular MPA and Subcutaneous MPA?
Yes, because the medicine contained in both types of DMPA (IM and SC DMPA) is 
identical, it is safe to switch back and forth between these two on a regular dosing 
schedule (i.e., every three months), if necessary. 
Q38. Does Subcutaneous MPA have a different effect on menstrual changes compared to 
Intramuscular DMPA?
No, both MPA-IM and MPA-SC cause similar menstrual changes and effect on bone 
mineral density as the hormonal level in blood is same.8
Q39. What is the difference between Subcutaneous MPA and Intramuscular MPA?
There is no difference between Subcutaneous MPA and MPA-IM in terms of medicine 
contained, how they work, their safety, effectiveness, and side effects. There is 
difference in amount of drug, route of administration, site of administration and size 
of needle.
Q40. How much weight do women gain when they use DMPA?
Some users of DMPA lose weight or have no significant change in weight. Some users 
may gain on an average 1-2 kg per year when using DMPA. This weight gain may be 
related to age, diet or sedentary lifestyle.9 Asian women in particular do not tend to 
gain weight while using DMPA.