Operational Guidelines  
on Facility Based Management of Children 
with Severe ACute MAlnutrition
Abbreviations
AHS Annual Health Survey
AWW Anganwadi worker
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist
CHC Community Health Centre
F-IMNCI Facility Based i ntegrated Management of newborn and Childhood i llnesses 
FRU First r eferral unit
HIV Human i mmunodeficiency virus
HFA Height-for-age
IV intravenous
IU international unit
mcg micrograms
MUAC Mid-upper Arm Circumference
NACO national AiDS Control organisation
NG nasogastric
NRC nutrition r ehabilitation Centre
NFHS national Family Health Survey
OPD outpatient Department
ORS oral rehydration Solution
PHC Primary Health Centre
RCH reproductive and Child Health
ReSoMal rehydration solution for malnourished children
 SAM Severe Acute Malnutrition
SD Standard DeviationAbbreviationsSRS Sample r egistration System
SST Supplementary Suckling technique
TOT training of trainers
VHND village Health and nutrition Day
 WFA Weight-for-age
 WFH Weight-for-height
WFL Weight –for- length
WHO World Health organizationcOntEnts

Sec tion2 clinical proTocols
1.  Screening for SAM in the community
Active and early case finding is an important determinant of case fatality rate, programme coverage and the 
programme impact . c ommunity mobilization is crucial for active and early case-finding.
to reduce the barriers to access, reduce case fatality and improve programme impact, screening must take place 
in the community and before the onset of medical complications. Active case finding should be done in the community by the AnM and AWW and aided by the ASHA of the village. it is important to supplement active 
case-finding with community sensitization which would lead to self-referral.
Frontline community workers (AWW, ASHA, AnM) can identify children with SAM by using simple coloured 
plastic strips that are designed to measure mid upper arm circumference (MUA c). they should also be able to 
recognise nutritional oedema of the feet, which is another sign of this condition. Regular growth monitoring at the Anganwadi centre or during Village Health and nutrition Day is an opportunity for active case finding. 
once identified, these children with SAM need further assessment to determine if they require referral to health 
facility and facility based care or whether they can be managed at community level with visits as outpatients to 
a health centre or facility.Besides active case finding in the community (through regular growth monitoring at AWc or during VHnD) all 
possible contact opportunities with children should be exploited including home visits, immunisation outreach 
sessions, visit to sub centres and all levels of health facilities. Assessing the nutrition status of all sick children 
presenting to health facility should be emphasized and wherever possible, included in physical examination 
guidelines/formats.the weight for height/length charts for identifying children with SD scores <- 3SD are attached as annexure 9 
and 10. 
Community --> (MU AC<115 or oedema)
with medical complications --> Inpa tient care of 
children with SAM 
and  medical 
complications --> Follow up --> Identify and ref er 
children with SA M



Case identification
Active screening  at village level by AWW/ASHA through house to house 
visit with MU AC tape f or all children (6 – 59 months) and look ing
 for presence/absence of bilateral pitting edema. 
Passiv e screening  during Growth Monitoring/V illage Health and Nutrition Days
 (VHND) using MU AC for all children (6–59 months) and look ing f or presence/  
absence of bilateral pitting edema.  


Admission criteria
Criteria for admission for inpatient treatment:
1. Children 6-59 months
Any of the following: 
- MUAC <115mm with or without any grade of oedema 
- WFH < -3 SD with or without any grade of oedema 
- Bilateral pitting oedema +/++ (children with oedema +++ always need inpatient care)
WITH Any of the following complications:
- Anorexia (Loss of appetite)
- Fever (39 degree c ) or Hypothermia (<35 c ) 
- Persistent vomiting
- Severe dehydration based on history and clinical examinationnot alert, very weak, apathetic, unconscious, convulsions
- Hypoglycemia
- Severe Anemia (severe palmar pallor)
- Severe pneumonia
- extensive superficial infection requiring iM medications
- Any other general sign that a clinician thinks requires admission for further assessment or care 
in addition to above criteria if the caregiver is unable to take care of the child at home, the child should be 
admitted.

2. Infants < 6 months:
- infant is too weak or feeble to suckle effectively (independently of his/her weight-for-length). 
or
- WfL (weight-for-length) <–3SD (in infants >45 cm) 
or
- Visible severe wasting in infants <45 cm 
or
- Presence of oedema both feet 

3. Other reasons for inpatient enrolment 
- Readmission: child previously discharged from in-patient care but meets admission criteria again.
- Return after default: child who returns after default (away from in-patient care for 2 consecutive days) and 
meets the admission criteria.  