REVISED GUIDANCE NOTE FOR FOLLOW- UP OF LBW & SNCU DISCHARGED INFANTS BY ASHA
(October 2016)

Abbreviations/ Acronyms-
1.	ANM - Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
2.	AWC - Anganwadi Centre
3.	AWW – Anganwadi Worker
4.	ASHA – Accredited Social Health Activist
5.	Hb – Haemoglobin
6.	IDA - Iron Deficiency Anaemia
7.	IFA - Iron and Folic Acid
8.	ORS – Oral Rehydration solution
9.	IMNCI - Integrated Management of Neonatal and Childhood Illness
10.	LBW - Low Birth Weight
11.	MCP - Mother and Child Protection Card
12.	MoHFW- Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
13.	MWCD - Ministry of Women and Child Development
14.	NFHS - National Family Health Survey
15.	PHC - Primary Health Centre
16.	MO – Medical Officer
17.	VHND - Village Health and Nutrition Day
18.	NHM – National Health Mission
19.	HBNC – Home Based Newborn Care
20.	SNCU – Special Newborn Care Unit
21.	NCD – Non-Communicable Disease
22.	MSG – Mission Steering Group
23.	NBSU – Newborn Stabilization Unit
24.	RBSK – Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram
25.	SAM – Severe Acute Malnutrition
26.	NRC- Nutritional Rehabilitation Center
27.	JSSK – Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram
28.	MCTS - Mother and Child Tracking System
29.	ARI - Acute Respiratory Infections
30.	CTM - Cotrimoxazole
31.	ICDS - Integrated Child Development Services

Role of ASHAs -
One of the key tasks of the ASHA is to undertake home visits for providing newborn care. Since the launch of HBNC guidelines in 2011, ASHAs trained in Round 1 Module 6 &7 or equivalent modules, are expected to provide home based newborn care.
In the year 2013, the Mission Steering Group (MSG) approved an incentive for ASHAs to provide follow up newborn care for babies discharged from SNCU and for LBW newborns. The schedule of the visits has been structured to one visit per quarter linked with an incentive of Rs. 50 per visit per quarter, from the 3rd month until 1 year of age. The incentive will be paid after completion of the age appropriate quarterly visits with completed forms and fulfilling the conditionalities irrespective of the number of visits
Home visit Schedule
➢	In case of SNCU discharged newborns, the day of discharge is to be taken as day one. ASHAs would make the first home visit within 24 hours of discharge (Day 1) and complete the remaining home visits as per HBNC visit schedule
i.e. 3, 7, 14, 21, 28 and 42ndday from the day of discharge.
➢	On completion of these visits ASHA will conduct follow up visit once every quarter starting from 3rdmonth onwards till one year of life i.e., four visits at the completion of 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th month of life
➢	In case of LBW or preterm newborn who did not require SNCU admission, after completion of HBNC visits(till42days of birth),ASHA will visit once every quarter starting from 3rdmonth onwards till one year of life i.e., four visits at the completion of 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th month of life.
Objectives of such follow up are:
1.	Ensuring compliance with follow up visits and treatment as advised on the discharge- ticket by SNCU / NBSU (Newborn Stabilization Unit)
 
2.	Timely identification of danger signs with prompt referral using JSSK referral mechanism
3.	Enabling access to health care services for treatment as and when required
4.	Integrating Anganwadi Center (AWC) services including growth monitoring and supplementary food


Tasks to be performed during Home Visits (as in HBNC period)

The follow up of SNCU Discharged babies will be continued after discharge and the activities performed will be same as that during HBNC
✓	Ensure compliance to medication and enable family to take the newborn for the follow up visits as prescribed in the SNCU discharge form
✓	Assess the following and refer in case of any complication-
i.	Check whether weight is being recorded in MCP card and monitor progress in weight gain.
ii.	Counsel the mother on danger signs and report if the baby has developed any danger signs
iii.	Look for congenital anomaly/malformation if any and referral to the PHC/MO (as per the instructions in Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) Module for ASHA)
iv.	Counsel the mother on early childhood development using the brochure and MCP card and report to ANM/MO-PHC if any abnormality/delay detected or reported by mother

✓	Provide information and counselling to families about –
i.	Taking extra care of such infants at home by hand washing for prevention of infection, thermal care and appropriate feeding support
ii.	Exclusive breast feeding till six month of age
 
iii.	Methods of breast feeding a LBW or preterm babies who are not able to suckle viz, expression of breast milk and use of palladi, katori spoon for feeding
iv.	Nutritional requirements of a lactating mother
v.	Suitable family planning methods for the couple
vi.	Importance of complete immunization
vii.	Timely initiation of complementary feeding and prevention of malnutrition.
viii.	Prevention of childhood illnesses like diarrhoea and pneumonia
ix.	Inform about the activities that parents can do to provide adequate stimulation for baby's growth.
x.	Micronutrient supplementation such as Syrup Iron and Folic Acid, Syrup Vitamin A as per GOI schedule


Activities to be performed by ASHA during first year followups on 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th months:
- Ensure that the weight is recorded and plotted on the
appropriate Growth chart (MCP card)
- Identify if the baby is in red zone, due to either no weight
gain or weight loss.
- Counsel the mother on danger signs and report if the baby
has developed any danger signs
- Counsel importance of hygiene practices like hand
washing
- Counsel the family on exclusive breastfeeding
- Counsel on timely initiation of complementary feeding and
continued breastfeeding
- Counsel on importance of proper diet for the child
- Check and ensure age appropriate vaccination
- Counsel the family on the importance of stimulation to the
children and age appropriate activities as per MCP Card
- Report if any defect /delay noticed
- IFA supplementation
- Vitamin A supplementation
- Provide prophylactic ORS to the mother
- Provide Zinc tablets to children with diarrhoea
- Extra visits to be made based on the discretion of ASHAs

Growth Monitoring -
➢	The weighing scale provided in the HBNC kit can weigh a baby of 5 kg therefore ASHA should weigh the baby using the weighing machine in the HBNC kit only till the baby weighs less than 5 kg.

➢	ASHA should coordinate with AWW for weighing the child (over 42 days old or weighing 5 kgs or more) and recording the information in the MCP card as well as AWC register as a routine activity. This can be done by taking the baby to AWC or at the VHND session.

Follow-up Activities
➢	Record names of these infants and share the list with ANM, who would maintain detailed information at sub centre and monitor the health and development of these infants for follow up activities on a regular basis and link with facilities as per the need. Like for delays contact RBSK team, for SAM (Severe Acute Malnutrition) refer to NRC (Nutritional Rehabilitation Center).

➢	Mobilize mothers of such infants for every VHND session to ensure complete immunization/ Vitamin A and IFA supplementation as well as for screening of selected 30 health conditions by RBSK team / ANM

➢	Ensure registration of such infants and their mothers with the nearest AWC for regular growth monitoring of the child and supplementary food provision for lactating mother and child (6 months to 3 years of age).



III.	Payment of Incentives
➢	ASHAs trained in Round 3 of Module 6 &7 are eligible for this incentive.
➢	ASHAs would be entitled to an incentive of Rs. 250 for completion of home visits as per HBNC programme till 42nd day after discharge in case of SNCU discharged newborns
➢	ASHAs would receive a total of Rs. 200 for four quarterly visits after completion of visits during 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12thmonth of life @ of Rs. 50 per quarter.
 
➢	Eligibility of ASHAs for quarterly incentive is subject to the following -
i.	ASHA has conducted the home visit and this is duly verified by the ANM/ ASHA facilitator.
ii.	Examination of the baby by ANM to screen for any complications and developmental delays has been done
iii.	Completion of Immunization of the child as per schedule and recommended (as per age and schedule)
iv.	Mother and child are registered with the AWC and weight of the child is taken with growth monitoring every month by the AWW and is recorded in the MCP card
v.	Child is alive till one year of age.


IV.	Field level support
The ASHA should be monitored by the ASHA Facilitator and ANM to check whether the quarterly visits are being conducted or not. At least one quarterly joint household visits with ASHAs should be planned to provide on the job mentoring, monitoring and support using supervisory checklists. ANMs should mentor the ASHAs in tasks requiring technical skills such as identification of sick newborn/ child.
➢	Care of LBW/ preterm newborns and of SNCU discharged newborns until one year of age, requires coordinated efforts of ASHA, ANM and AWW at the village level. It is essential that once such a newborn is identified, ASHAs, ANM and AWW share the information about child's status and act as a team to ensure better health status of the child.
➢	Payment vouchers of ASHAs would be verified by ANM / ASHA facilitator after due validation of home visits and all the conditionality as mentioned above. ANM/ AF can verify the activities undertaken by ASHA and access of services to
 
the child (AWC, immunization, growth monitoring and health services) during their visits to the village.
➢	ANMs are expected to examine all such children till one year of age either by visiting their households (preferably joint visits with ASHAs) and/ or during the VHND session.
➢	ANM should also ensure that the MCP card of such children is duly filled and entry is made in the MCTS.


V.	Facility Follow Up
Facility follow up of all the newborn that are being discharged from SNCU must be continued as counselled at the time of discharge irrespective of the home visits by ASHA. Each visit for immunisation if at the facility must be utilized in getting the follow up.
In case the newborn cannot be taken to SNCU at district level ASHA should counsel the family to let the infant be examined at the nearest health facility. The list of SNCU graduates should be shared with the RBSK team at the DEIC and also with PHC MO I/C during monthly meeting to have convergence with RBSK programme. This message should also be reiterated during the training of ASHAs.
VI.	Recording and Reporting of the Follow up activities
ASHAs will have to record the activities done in a simple reporting format.The format will be verified by the ANM/ASHA Facilitator. The information will be collected by ANM/ ASHA Facilitator and compiled at the block level by Block Community Mobilizer and collated at the state level by the child
 
health programme officials. The collate information is to be shared with the Child Health Division in the prescribed reporting format.
States are encouraged to develop a mechanism to send sms alerts or call alerts to ASHAs, as soon as any newborn whether normal or SNCU admitted or LBW newborn is discharged from the health facility. Such systems can be developed by integrating existing MCTS (Mother and Child Tracking System) and SNCU software. This system would ensure that ASHA receives timely information about newborn's arrival in the village and would enable her to follow up all newborn as soon the family returns to village