
 
1. Setting the Context
This is a reference handbook for service providers, posted at Primary Health Centers 
(PHCs), Community Health Centres (CHCs) and tertiary care hospitals (DH), who are 
engaged in providing care and support services to the adolescents and young people. The 
target audience for this reference handbook include following cadres of service providers:
• Doctors
• Nurses, and Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANMs)
• Counsellors.
This handbook aims at sensitising and equipping service providers with the perspectives, 
adequate knowledge and skills required to provide stigma-free, non-judgemental and 
comprehensive sexual and reproductive health services to young people.

1.1 Who are Adolescents, Youth and Young People?
While there is no strict definition for the term ‘youth’, most UN documents use the age-
group of 15-24 years to refer to youth. WHO defines ‘Adolescents’ as individuals in the 10-
19 years’ age group and ‘Youth’ as the 15-24 years’ age group. While ‘Young People’ covers 
the age range 10-24 years. In this handbook, the age specific categories have been defined as 
follows:
Adolescence 10-19 years
Early Adolescence 10 to 14 years
Late Adolescene 15 to 19 years
Youth 15 to 24 years
Young People 10 to 24 years
Youth are defined as those aged 15 to 29 in the national youth policy (2014). This age-group 
constitutes 27.5% of India’s population 24-Oct-2014.
1.2 Policy Landscape in India
India is proudly known as a young country as its population comprises of a large number 
of young people. Recognizing the importance of protecting and supporting health and 
well-being of its young population, the Government of India is committed to strengthening 
its programmes and systems for adolescents. This is visible through the Governments 
commitment towards the Adolescent Reproductive and Sexual Health Strategy 
(ARSH) launched in 2005 and, subsequently, through the National Adolescent Health Programme (Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram or RKSK) launched in 2014. Under 
the ARSH program , in 2006 under the RCH II strategy Government of India established 
Adolescent Reproductive Sexual Health (ARSH) Clinic to provide counselling on sexual 
& reproductive health issues to the adolescent population. Further, since 2014, under the 
National Adolescent Health Programme (NAHP), the Government of India has established 
Adolescent Friendly Health Clinics to address clinical and counselling services on diverse 
adolescent health issues ranging from Sexual and Reproductive Health (SRH) to Nutrition, 
Substance abuse, Injuries and Violence, Non Communicable Diseases and Mental Health. 
As of 2020, 8099 AFHCs1 are active and functional. In the state of Uttar Pradesh, only 0.4% 
adolescents were aware of the existence and relevance of AFHCs. According to a study 
conducted by Population Council 2 awareness on AFHCs remains limited and varies across 
states.This low awareness when combined with the critical deficiency in infrastructure 
(7381 facilities for 253 million youth) points towards the urgent need to fill the gap in 
service delivery, for all young people. Even though youth is in general the healthiest 
period of life, there are evidences that show that differences of mortality amongst youth 
are striking in different countries. In more developed regions, Northern Africa, Eastern 
Asia and Western Asia only 1 per cent or less of 15-year olds do not survive to their 25th 
birthday. Concurrently, the odds of dying during youth are almost twice as high in South 
Asia.
This handbook has been written with the objective of training and sensitizing the service 
providers on youth friendly service delivery across the public health system. It is not just 
limited to RKSK counsellors as we recognise that there is a need to increase the medical 
service provider base by mainstreaming youth-friendliness in the system.
1.3 SRH Status of Youth in India
Following evidence on youth health indicators points towards the urgent need to address 
service delivery for improving the SRH status of youth.
• 35.4% of the women (20-24 years) reported being married before the age of 18.
• 8% of adolescents aged between 15 – 19 years have started child bearing. Of these 5% 
had already experienced a live birth and 3% were pregnant with their first child. 
• Unmet need of contraception for women in the age group 20 – 24 years was 22% or 
more than one in five couples.
• Among men in the 20 – 24 age-groups the knowledge of contraceptives is also nearly 
universal, but usage is low with less than 20% of married or sexually active men using 
any modern contraceptive. Only 63% of young men knew that a condom was an 
effective contraceptive.  
• There is higher risk of maternal deaths in the younger age groups, between 13 and  
19 years4. 
• 63 per cent of all suicide deaths reported in India were in the 15-39 age group. Suicide 
ranked first in India as the cause of death compared to its third rank globally in this 
age group, it said.5 There was an increase of 40 per cent in the number of suicide deaths 
between 1990 and 2016, with an estimated 2,30,314 deaths in 2016 indicating that 
“disproportionately high suicide deaths in India are a public health crisis”.
• The factors because of which youth are not able to access services is that they are not 
allowed to take decisions to access health services independently and they are allowed 
freedom of movement. According to NFHS-4: 
• Only 29% and 40% of women in the age group of 15-19 years and 20-24 years’ age 
group are allowed to go to health facility alone. 
•  Only 36% of married women without a living child are allowed to visit a health 
facility alone. 
• Only 61% and 69% of currently married women aged 15-19 and 20-24 years make 
decisions about their own health care alone, or jointly with their husbands, while 
one fourth 39% and 31% respectively in these age groups do not have any say in 
decisions about their own health care (NFHS-4). 
Why is it Difficult for Young People to Access SRH Information and 
Services? 
Very few youg people are able to access SRH information and services. Some of the 
simultaneous challenges that make it difficult for young people to access the quality SRH 
services are listed below6: 
1. Social norms:  Prevalent social norms that deem conversation on SRH a ‘taboo’ and 
discourage information seeking around the same.7 As a result, there is fear of getting 
recognised by family and community members amongst youth when seeking SRH 
services. 
2. Viewed as ‘minors’ and inexperienced:  Owing to their social position/status 
adoloscents and young people are viewed as ‘minors’ and are discouraged to visit 
the health facilities alone. Youth are often viewed as inexperienced and as lacking the 
knowledge and skills required to make healthy decisions or choices.8
3. Lack of information:  Lack of access to timely, accurate and comprehensive information 
on youth-friendly SRH services especially for youth who have dropped out of 
schools.
4. Attitude of the providers: Provider attitudes are oftentimes uninformed, judgmental 
and disrespectful discouraging youth from seeking SRH services.11 Additional barriers 
such as stressing upon parental/guardian consent discourage unmarried youth from 
approaching the service providers. 

5. Health facility characteristics:  Lack of privacy and confidentiality and unfriendly 
environment in health facilities and non-availability of a range of SRH services, further 
discourages young people from approaching these facilities.
6. Legal barriers: On one hand, there are no legal restrictions for a young person to be 
provided with contraceptive services, however, the Prevention of Children from Sexual 
Offences (POCSO) Act, 2012 is a law which seeks to protect children (any person below 
the age of eighteen) from sexual abuse. A provision in the law on mandatory reporting 
however, makes it difficult to access SRH services by women below the age of eighteen 
as the law views any form of sexual encounter (even if consensual) as violence. Hence, 
service providers are mandated to file a medico-legal case if a young person below 18 
seeks any SRH service like delivery, contracdeption, abortion or HIV testing. Though 
many adolescents are not aware about POCSO Act if there are encounter medico-
legal situation while availing services, it result into  compromise to their privacy and 
confidentiality, and severely discourages young people to seek services.
7. Lack of affordability:  Since many young people do not like to go to public health 
facilities due to issues such as privacy and confidentiality, there could be lack of 
affordability due to high cost at private facilities. On the other hand, the services in 
private facilities are often costly. A majority of the youth, whether school going or out-
of-school, married or unmarried lack financial independence and/or capacity to procure 
health services especially from high cost private facilities.
As individual practitioners, awareness of the context in which a young client is located 
can change the way you approach him or her. A more sensitive, empathetic and rights-
based approach towards the client will likely improve provider - client interaction, client 
compliance and health outcomes. The handbook consists of good practices for the services 
providers to overcome legal challenges in service provision. 
2. Mainstreaming Youth Friendly Health  
Services
While a lot of SRH information 
is available on the internet/
unreliable sources of 
information, young people often 
run into more misinformation 
than easy to understand facts. 
Although health service centers 
and providers continue to 
be source for accurate and 
comprehensive sexual and 
reproductive health information 
for young people, however, 
they are often embarrassed to 
discuss sexual health issues 
and are scared of being judged 
and labelled if they raise these 
concerns. This is why young 
clients are highly intimidated in approaching a health facility, leading to low health seeking 
behaviour across genders. To change this and mainstream youth friendly, it is important 
that all persons at the facility including the administrative and OPD staff, nurses and 
doctors ensure a safe, welcoming and non judgemental environment for young people 
who want to access health information and services.
2.1 Youth-Friendly Services: Some Key Principles
In order for a health service to be ‘Youth-friendly’, it must incorporate some essential 
elements at
• the provider level,
• the services level, and 
• the facility level.
2.1.1 The Provider
It is important that all health service providers (including doctor, a nurse, a counselor or an 
ANM in charge of a primary healthcare facility) have required competencies for providing 
youth friendly health services. 
 
• “Youth”, is not a single category, and includes diverse cross-sections of youth belonging 
to multiple and overlapping social categories and backgrounds Eg. educated/ 
uneducated, married/ unmarried; having low / high socio-economic status; migrant/ 
non-migrants; tribal, dalit; trans youth, youth living with HIV etc. Thus, providers must 
listen attentively to the client’s case, and ask pertinent questions to understand the 
circumstances the client is bound by. 
• Simple practice like addressing them by their name, communicating in a sensitive, non-
judgmental and non- threatening tone will go a long way in building trust and rapport 
with the client. 
The below principles directly align with and reinforce the principles of ethical medical practice  
familiar to all health service providers.
1. Autonomy and Informed Consent
• Youth, just like anybody else, have the right to acquire correct information and 
make informed decisions about their own bodies. The provider has the ethical 
responsibility to uphold the youth client’s autonomy, by explaining diagnosis 
and treatment in non-medical language, so that young people can decide for their 
own health. Remember, no law prohibits the provision of medically accurate 
and comprehensive SRH information to youth with the intent of advancing their 
awareness and wellbeing.
• Providers should not assume that they can share any details (e.g. what service 
did the young person come for, the problem they have, the sexual history, the 
results of tests if done, the treatment chosen by them, etc.) with their parents, 
spouse, and/or other family members. Revealing sensitive information to family 
members can severely compromise the situation of young people, and could 
result in stigma, and even severe physical and emotional violence, and in some 
cases, marital problems.
• It is important to maintain a balance between the provision of SRH service 
and the requirements of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) 
Act, 2012 which is for protection of minors from sexual offences. The service 
provider should be mindful of fullfiling the requirements of the POCSO Act 
and, if the client is a mature minor, the provider may ask the client to suggest a 
trusted adult of their preference, in place of the legal/natural guardian. This is 
recommended, especially because the perpetrator of sexual offence could be a 
family member.
For instance: 
If a 19-year-old young woman has approached you for information related to 
abortion, the responses from you that show or indicate openness is:  Do not worry. You have done the right thing by approaching me. The 
decision to have an abortion is entirely yours. I will ensure that this 
remains confidential.  If there is anything that is bothering you, please do 
not hesitate to share with me.



2. Privacy and Confidentiality
• Young people seeking SRH services often fear the risk of peers and elders finding 
out. Such fear is reasonable, because the taboo attached to reproductive health 
issues health is so significant that it could result in the young person’s social 
stigmatisation and eventual social exclusion. 
• Therefore, it is important that service providers and facility staff maintain 
privacy during the consultation, do not reveal the identity of clients while 
sharing medical records for official purposes, or discussing medical history with 
colleagues, support staff or even friends. 
• There may be situations where a family member or neighbour asks a provider 
to reveal why the young person came to them for services. In such cases, the 
providers should not reveal the actual service sought by the young person and 
can tactfully give a response or refusing to give details. 
For instance: 
If a young married woman has approached you for an emergency contraceptive pill 
and there are other clients present there, how will you talk to her?
You could request the other clients to wait outside  saying that you have 
a report to complete. You could then speak to the young woman after 
everyone has left. 

3. Non-judgmental attitude
• Any sign of judgment around masturbation, bodily changes, unplanned 
pregnancy, abortion etc. will inhibit the young person from truthfully revealing 
their problem or query, impede service provision and ultimately, the client’s 
good health and well-being. 
For instance: 
If a young woman talks to you about her irregular menstrual cycle, then what would 
be the appropriate sensitive and respectful response? 
This is common when girls are growing up. There is no need to worry. 
First, could you tell me a bit about about your diet? Do you eat three 
proper meals a day? 


4. Provider attitudes and practices
• When young people visit the health facility, for their reproductive health-related 
issues, it is appropriate to equip them with evidence-based and comprehensive 
health information that will help them to make informed decisions beneficial to 
their health and wellbeing.
Remember:  Denying access to quality SRH information and services can lead to 
adverse health outcomes of the young client, and also, in doing so, the provider is in 
violation of the principle of ‘truthfulness’ and, ‘doing no harm’.

2.1.2 Essential Package of Services
As mentioned earlier, ‘youth’ is a time when critical milestones such as physical, mental 
and emotional maturation, sexual activity, marriage and pregnancy are commonly 
navigated. It is important that young people are ensured respectful and dignified SRH 
services. Thus the following package of services are essential for ensuring their good health 
and well-being. 

Integrated 
Counseling 
Services: 
Provide comprehensive and integrated counseling on a full range 
of issues such as puberty, menarche, nightfall, sexual attraction, 
masturbation, violence especially gender based violence and intimate 
partner violence, conception, contraception, abortion and STIs/RTIs, 
and safe sex practices.
If the young client is seeking a pregnancy test, provide information 
on pregnancy testing, as well as contraception and abortion towards 
maximising, clients’ autonomy  and choice . 
Youth clients seeking SRH services approach health facilities, with great 
nervousness. They are unlikely to honestly share concerns at once. Exercise 
patience, and probe sufficiently so that the actual problem of the client can be 
understood. 

Menstrual 
Health and 
Hygiene 
Management:
Create awareness about menstruation and menstrual hygiene. 
• Inform them on where they can access and use sanitary pads or 
other methods of sanitary protection, and how to dispose them. 
• Tell them that puberty is the time of growth spurt, body changes 
and onset of menarche is a normal physiological change, and is also 
transformation in the lives of adolescent girls.
• Address various myths and misconceptions around menstrual 
taboos, that restrict their movement, education, other activities and 
health during menstruation.
• Provide treatment for irregular period or menstrual problems.

Provision of 
Contraception:
 Provide the full range of contraceptives offered by the Family Planning 
programme (eg. condoms, EC, Oral pills, injectables etc.) irrespective 
of thei r marital status.  
This  shoul d also include pre-marital counselling for girls and boys. 
Age shoul d not be a restriction to provide low dose combined 
contracepti ve pills to adolescents.12
Emphasis s hould be placed on encouraging male participation where 
contraceptive uptake is concerned. 

Safe Abortion 
Services:
Ensure that young women are able avail safe abortion (upto 20 
weeks of gestation) under circumstances mentioned in the Medical 
Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) Act. They should also get post 
abortion care, contraceptive services and referral services on priority 
irrespective of their marita l status. 
• Young cl ients’ must have access to an appropriate abortion method 
as per their eligibility and choice of method (medical abortion pills, 
vacuum aspiration). 
• For women 18 or above, the woman herself can give consent and 
providers should not insist on signatures of their family members 
as per MTP Act. 
• In case of girl below 18, written consent must be obtained from a 
guardian. A guardian can be any person who is major and consents to take her care for abortion care related procedure. In case of a 
minor the provider should inform the police as per the requirements 
of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (POCSO), 
2012. In such cases mandates under the POCSO Act must not delay 
or impede the client’s access to safe abortion services.

Maternal 
Health-related 
Services:
 All facilities should offer maternal health services in a non-
judgemental manner, to young teenage girls and women, irrespective 
of marital status. Respectful along with evidence based maternity care 
should be provided to young mothers, and they should be provided a 
proper counseling on contraceptive methods to delay next pregnancy. 

RTIs/STIs 
Management 
Services:
Since RTIs/STIs are often under-reported especially in women, screen 
women for high risk and possible symptoms when they seek care. 
• Integrate screening for STI/RTI into routine clinical practice, 
especially SRH and HIV related services, 
• Provide treatment if available or 
• Have close referral links to a clinic where such services are 
provided.

Diagnosis and 
management 
of other SRH 
issues:
Young people might need other SRH services such as early detection 
of pregnancy, menstrual distrubances, or hirsutism (which could 
be linked to polycystic ovarian disease). Diagnosis and appropriate 
management of these conditions are an essential component of youth-
friendly services. 

Care for 
Survivors of 
Violence:
Cases of violence including rape, domestic violence, intimate partner 
violence and child sexual abuse are usually undisclosed. Instances 
of violence can be physical, mental, emotional and sexual in nature, 
and it is important that all providers are sensitive to these issues, 
and are oriented on the law (PWDVA, POCSO, The Criminal Law 
(Amendment) Act 2013) and associated guidelines on ‘Strengthening 
Health Sector Response to Violence’13.
Providers shoul d be able to: 
• detect signs of violence based on clients’ history, and undertake 
screening procedures for those clients who display these signs. 
• Remember that the first step is to offer medical aid/services. Mandatory 
reporting is the second step, after informing the client and connecting 
them to a support NGO. 
• Establish referral linkages with government and non-government/
support institutions who can facilitate redressal for victims of 
violence.

Interconnection 
of SRH and 
mental health:
Mental health problems remain a widely unaddressed issue at large. 
They could be linked to various social barriers, educational attainment, 
personal relations, or health issues such as unwanted pregnancy, or 
postpartum depression. Providers should be competent to: 
• Identify mental health needs and its interconnectedness with SRH 
issues. 
• Identify the symptoms and make proper referrals to specialists for 
advanced care for medication or therapy.   

2.1.3 The Facility
All facilities which provide RMNCHA health services should should be youth-friendly. 
Some of the considerations that experts have found useful for developing youth-friendly 
atmosphere in a facility are as follows: 

• Visual and Auditory 
Privacy:
Ensure visual and 
auditory privacy 
of the client so that 
youth feel safe 
and comfortable to 
consult the doctor 
and procure relevant 
services. For ensuring 
visual and auditory 
privacy include 
following
1. Curtains in the 
examination area; 
close the door of 
the OPD while client consultaion. In case of a consultation of a female client 
by a male provider, it is essential to have a female chaperone in the room. 
2. Unless otherwise requested by the client, keep other persons out of the room 
during examination;
3. To the extent possible, ensure other people in the OPD are not over-hearing 
the conversations with the client;
4. Install condom boxes in non-crowded sections of the clinic or health facility, 
and in locations where they can go discreetly.
• Availability of female attendant:
1. As far as possible, it should be ensured that a female client is seen by a female 
provider and a male client is seen by a male provider. 
2. During the consultation and examination of a young woman by a male 
provider, ensure that a female attendant is available. This should be ensured 
even for interactions between female clients and male lab technicians, X ray 
technicians, OT assistants etc. 
• Facility Environment:
1. Install signages for various services, so that young people can easily navigate 
the facility. 

2. Train the support staff like the people at registrarion counter, cleaner staff etc., 
they should be assisting young people in navigating the facility and maintain 
confidentiality.
• IEC Material:
Display IEC material in the waiting area and the provider’s room that is useful to 
young people’s SRH needs, and helps destigmatize young people’s need to seek 
SRH services such as contraception, abortion, mental health etc. 
• Stocking of commodities and other supplies, for example:
1. Ensure availability ofthe different types of contraceptive methods, e.g. 
condoms, oral contraceptive pills, EC pills, Injectable contraceptive (Antara),
2. Pregnancy test kits
3. STI and HIV testing kits 
4. Medical Abortion pills 
5. Pamphlets / brochures/ IEC material for young people n various topics 
• Youth Feedback and Engagement:  
Organise a mechanism to get feedback from the young people on their experience 
of services, or willingness to receive services. It can function as a sub-group of the 
Rogi Kalyan Samiti or be drawn from the Village Health Nutrition and Sanitation 
Committees. 
Feedback may be written on a piece of paper anonymously or a feedback form 
may be developed and dropped in the feedback box. Feedback box can be opened 
periodically and facility in-charge may address all the concerns (if any).
The forum can serve the following purposes, among others:
1. Provide inputs about the range and nature of services available as well as 
generate feedback on the effectiveness of the services being provided. 
2. Provide feedback from the young people who did not visit the facility despite 
having a need. 
3. Conduct a periodic assessment/audit of the facility based on a simple 
checklist.

3. Good Practices for Youth Friendly Service 
Provision 
In this section some situations on youth friendly service provisioning and facility readiness 
in providing youth friendly services will be discussed. The situations are presented in the 
form of case studies followed by discussions. These are common situations wich you may 
come across while dealing with SRH issues of young people
SRH NEEDS OF 
YOUNG WOMAN  
Case Study 1: 
Assessing Rinku’s 
Immediate and Long-
Term Needs
Rinku is 16 years old 
and works in a garment 
factory in a nearby town, 
20 kms away. In the last 
couple of weeks, she has 
been experiencing pain 
in her vagina and having 
foul smell discharge and 
itching while urinating. She comes to the District Hospital and is directed to a female 
gynecologist. 
The provider counsels Rinku in a private room, and Rinku explains that she is 
experiencing some discomfort in her genitals whilst urinating. The provider asks 
her if she is sexually active. Rinku says that she is in an intimate relationship but has 
never engaged in sexual intercourse. The provider then explains to Rinku that she 
would have to examine Rinku’s genitals, and obtains Rinku’s consent for the same. 
After the examination, the provider assures Rinku that there is nothing to worry 
about, and that she is just experiencing a mild fungal infection in the vagina, that is 
causing the foul smelling discharge and pain during urination. She writes down a 
prescription for a vaginal cream, and hands it to Rinku. Rinku thanks the doctor and 
leaves.
Important Observations from the Case
1. Rinku is young and therefore it could have been difficult for her to access the clinic.
2. Rinku clearly states that she has a partner with whom she gets intimate. Thus she 
would require comprehensive and integrated counselling on safe sex, contraception and 
abortion. 

What did the gynecologist get right?
1. The gynecologist counselled the client in private.
2. The gynecologist does not enquire about ‘marital status’ but specifically asks if the client 
is ‘sexually active’. This is a good practice as it is common for young people to engage in 
sex irrespective of their marital status!
3. The gynecologist does not display any signs of judgment throughout the counseling, 
thereby normalising SRH seeking. 
Did Rinku receive comprehensive SRH counselling and services?
While recording client history, be attentive to the clients’ immediate as well as long-term 
SRH needs/concerns. In this case, Rinku mentions that she has a partner with whom she 
gets intimate. Therefore, alongside STI counselling, the gynecologist should have also 
provided counselling on contraceptive options, unwanted pregnancy and other issues as 
needed. Integrated counselling and service provision optimises clients’ time in the facility, 
and reduces the burden on young people - who face severe barriers in making multiple 
visits to the clinic, due the restriction of their mobility and financial constraints. 

When Dealing 
Young Woman and 
Issues on Gender 
Preference 
Case Study 2: What 
are Laxmi’s Needs?
Laxmi is 20 years old 
and has been married 
for around 3 years. She 
has 2 daughters and she 
lives with her husband, 
children and mother-in-
law in the city. One day, 
Laxmi realises that she 
has missed her period 
for 2 consecutive months, and purchases a pregnancy testing kit. The pregnancy test 
result confirms that Laxmi is pregnant. Thus, Laxmi accompanied by her mother-in-
law visits the nearby district hospital, to consult a gynecologist. 
Laxmi does not want another child but she knows that her mother-in-law is waiting 
for a son in the family. The doctor asks the two of them to take a seat, and listens 
silently to the details provided by Laxmi’s mother-in-law. The doctor asks Laxmi 
as to how she would like to proceed. Laxmi tells the doctor that she wants to know 
if she is pregnant or not. The doctor examines Laxmi and confirms that Laxmi is 
2 months pregnant. Laxmi’s mother-in-law is overjoyed and asks the doctor what 
are the chances of a male fetus. The doctor says that she will be unable to predict 
the same, and also informs the mother-in-law that sex determination is illegal. The 
doctor also congratulates Laxmi and requests the nurse prepare Laxmi’s antenatal 
schedule.
Important Observation from the Case
1. In the span of 3 years, Laxmi had already given birth to 2 girls without adequate spacing . 
Therefore, a third child at this stage poses significant risk and may adversely impact 
health of both pregnant woman and fetus. 
2. Moreover, In India, ‘male preference’ is a social norm that manifests in families applying 
undue pressure on women to conceive a male child. Even in Laxmi’s case, 2 girl children 
and the lack of spacing can be indicative of undue pressure from the family.
3. Therefore, Laxmi and her husband may be in need of counselling on contraception 
and abortion. It is important to counsel on discrimination and violence at home due to 
gender preference and moreover, due to the desire for a son in the family, she may not 
be able to negotiate for contraception use with her husband.
What did the doctor do right?
1. The doctor listened attentively. Attentiveness and eye-contact while taking history, 
helps build client’s trust and promotes honesty.
2. The doctor specifically asked Laxmi how she would like to proceed, and not the mother-
in-law. 
3. The doctor denies fetal sex-determination, which is as per the requirements of Pre 
Conception Pre Natal Diagnostic Techniques (PCPNDT) Act, 1994. PCPNDT Act 
renders sex determination illegal and penalises medical service providers offering sex 
selective diagnostic techniques and selective abortion services. 

Did the doctor uphold the principles of youth friendly health service delivery?
1. No. The doctor violated the principles of ‘privacy’, ‘confidentiality’ and ‘autonomy’.
2. Since the doctor counselled the client in the presence of her mother-in-law, the client 
did not get a chance to decide the course of her pregnancy herself. Within the family 
structure, mother-in-laws carry more authority than their daughter-in-laws. For 
instance, the mother-in-law spoke on behalf of Laxmi twice, even though Laxmi was the 
client.  
3. The doctor assumes that Laxmi would want to bear a child. Thus, she does not counsel 
Laxmi about the options available, including the option of terminating the pregnancy, 
contraceptive counseling with her husband for long-term family planning. In doing this, 
the doctor has limited Laxmi’s choice and her autonomy to make decision.
How could the doctor have provided comprehensive counselling services?
1. A provider should always counsel the client in private . The spouse/family member/
friend can be present initially, but should be requested to step out. The stigma attached 
to SRH is so high that clients are honest only when privacy and confidentiality  is 
guaranteed. 
2. Ideally, the provider should have asked the mother-in-law to step out, disclosed the test 
results to Laxmi in private, obtained her informed consent OR given Laxmi the chance 
to decide if she wants to continue the pregnancy or not. Depending on her choice, the 
doctor should have supported Laxmi if she wants to not disclose the information to her 
mother-in-law and husband.
3. Even in the case of a minor, the client should be counselled separately, because they are 
likely to withhold information in the presence of the guardian.
4. The provider should have informed Laxmi of the possibility of terminating the 
pregnancy, on grounds of ‘contraceptive failure’ or ‘causing harm to the pregnant 
person’s mental health’. Therefore, while recording the history of the client, be attentive 
to the clients’ multiple SRH needs/concerns. 
5. The provider should have also counselled Laxmi on how to deal with family pressure. 
If the provider suspects/client inform about gender based violence based on gender 
preference at home, he/she she should connect her to support and care services for 
ensuring that she receives sustained support in addressing the matter. At every stage, 
inform the client of the comprehensive list of services available to them, to maximise 
clients’ choice and autonomy .  

Young People and 
Contraceptive 
Counseling 
Case Study 3: 
Contraceptives 
Counselling is for 
Everyone
Rajesh and Seema, 20 and 
19 years old respectively, 
are from neighboring 
villages. They are both 
studying in college and 
have their classes only 
on Sundays. They work 
in the same garment factory on weekdays in a nearby town. They have known each 
other for the last 3 years and have been in a romantic relationship for the last 2 years. 
Since both of them have elder siblings as well as family responsibility, they cannot 
think of getting married for the next 2-3 years. However, both of them get intimate 
occasionally. 
They come to the district hospital which is far from their village but close to their 
factory to seek contraceptive services. The privacy was maintained during the 
consultation, there were no other clients in the room. The service provider begins 
with asking Seema her name, age and the problem. When Seema tells the provider 
that she wants to use contraception, the service provider immediately asks if they are 
married. Rajesh and Seema look at each other and Rajesh responds, “no, but we will 
get married next month.” The service provider says that they can come back next 
month and she will provide them oral contraceptive pills as that would be a good 
option for her to avoid pregnancy.
Important Observations from the Case
1. Rajesh and Seema have an intimate relationship and they cannot marry each other due 
to the family situation at home. 
2. Both of them come together to the facility which is far from their village to seek 
contraception so that nobody recognises them. Upon enquiry, they lie that they will get 
married next month and are still denied services. 
What did the provider do right?
1. The provider ensured that the privacy is maintained. No other client was allowed to 
enter the room during the consultation.  
What did the provider not do right?
1. The provider did not give them information on all available reversible contraceptive 
options, and allowed them to decide which one they wanted. She straightaway jumped 
to advising oral pills. She should have offered them contraception options and ensured 
that they leave with at least one contraceptive. 
2. The service provider asked them their marital status. As highlighted previously, marital 
status is not a qualifier to receive the services and the providers should refrain from 
asking the marital status. Provider cannot impose their opinion on their clients and need 
to be non-judgmental towards it. 
3. The provider did not provide them any contraceptives and asked them to come back 
after they were married. 
Is it okay to provide contraceptive counselling to unmarried youth? 
1. Yes, it is okay. 
2. Young people have a right to be in a consensual sexual relationship and seek healthcare 
services as an adult at the age of 18 and above, irrespective of marital status. They do 
not require guardian consent and can take independent decisions. The service provider 
should not delay or deny them services on any grounds. They should offer them 
proper counselling on contraception and help them choose from the available basket of 
contraceptive choices.
What additional steps could the provider have taken?
1. The provider should have taken a history of last unprotected contact and ise of 
contraceptoves. If needed, the provider could have offered emergency contraceptive 
pills. 
2. The provider needs to ensure a sensitive and non-judgmental attitude towards 
premarital sex. This can be communicated through words, body language as well as 
facial expression.
3. The provider can ask if they are sexually active to record sexual history. Inform them 
that an accurate record will enable them to provide better services and that their sexual 
history will remain confidential. 
4. The provider can enable them to make an informed decision on contraception usage. 
This can be done by providing counseling on each method and introducing the basket 
of choices.   25
Young People and 
Fertility Choices 

Case Study 4: Rubina 
is the Authority of 
Her own Fertility 
Outcomes
Rubina is 19 years old and 
resides in a slum dwelling 
with her parents. She 
runs a general store with 
her father. Rubina has a 
boyfriend who lives close 
to her house. 
Rubina has missed her period in the last two months and she visits a female doctor 
for a pregnancy test with a friend. The doctor was accompanied by the nurse in the 
consultation room. There were no other patients in the room. The service provider 
asks Rubina if she had had sex with someone. Rubina says that she had had sex with 
her boyfriend 2 months back. After testing, the provider confirms that Rubina is 9 
weeks pregnant. Rubina begins to feel very scared of the consequences of her parents 
getting to know about the pregnancy. 
The service provider tells 
Rubina that she should 
have thought of her 
parents earlier and now 
she should not complain. 
Rubina asks the provider 
about abortion and the 
provider says that she 
will only be able to do it 
if she brings her mother 
along. Rubina leaves 
the consultation room 
unsatisfactorily and is 
approached by the nurse 
who was there in the 
consultation room. 
The nurse tells Rubina that she can do abortion for her without the guardian’s 
consent. She will charge 15,000 (INR). The nurse gives her the contact number to get 
in touch. When Rubina asks when and where she has to come, the nurse says that 
she will call Rubina to her house.
 
Important Observations from the Case
1. Rubina’s age is more than 18 years and she considered it important to visit a doctor after 
missing her period. Rubina was accompanied by her friend to the provider. Her friend’s 
support was an enabler for her to access the services. 
2. The doctor undertakes a pregnancy test and informs Rubina to come with her mother 
for the abortion. Since she is unmarried, there are high chances that parental consent 
would be a barrier for her to access abortion. 
3. While the intention of the nurse was to provide abortion services to Rubina, she also 
breached her right to confidentiality by offering to do it outside the facility. She also 
overcharges Rubina and in accordance to MTP Act only providers approved by the 
Act can provide abortion services and an unapproved provider can be penalised for 
terminating a pregnancy. 
What did the doctor do right?
1. The doctor informed Rubina that she is 9 weeks pregnant. 
2. The doctor took Rubina’s sexual history.
3. The doctor ensured privacy during the consultation as there were no other patients in 
the room. 
Is it okay to provide her abortion services without the guardian consent? 
1. Yes, according to the Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) Act, if the woman’s 
age is above 18 years, only her consent is needed. The consent of gaurdian/parents not 
required. It is more important to ensure that they have access to safe abortion services 
irrespective of the marital status. There was no need for the doctor to ask Rubina to 
bring her mother.
2. Denying abortion services may encourage unsafe aborions as woman may seek abortion 
services from an illegal and unsafe, back street abortion provider like in this case.
Was the doctor right in delaying the procedure? 
1. The doctor delayed the abortion procedure. Since abortion is a time-sensitive matter, 
it is highly unadvisable to delay the procedure. Moreover, Rubina was confident and 
decisive about what she wanted, there was no reason to delay the procedure. 
Was the action of the nurse correct? 
1. The nurse advised Rubina to opt for abortion services outside the facility. Along with 
ensuring privacy, the doctor and the support staff need to ensure confidentiality of the 
client too. 
2. The nurse offered to provide services at her home at an overcharged rate. It is illegal 
and unethical to take advantage of Rubina’s vulnerability by offering to provide services 
at a higher rate. 
How can one ensure confidentiality? 
1. The providers should not disclose the case history to anyone outside the facility. The 
verbal communication and the written records should remain within the professional 
boundaries of the facilities and should not be discussed outside. 
2. All the support staff should be trained in maintaining the confidentiality norms and 
protocols. 
What additional steps could the doctor have taken?
1. The doctor could have accepted Rubina’s decision to terminate the pregnancy as she 
is not doing anything illegal. She is an adult and her independent decision is the only 
prerequisite to provide the services. The doctor is bound to provide her services by 
maintaining privacy and confidentiality as per her request. 
2. The doctor can provide quality abortion services using methods in accordance with the 
MoHFW14 guidelines. 
3. The doctor can ensure that the nurses and support staff are trained in your facility 
on following protocols and maintaining rights including right to privacy and 
confidentiality of the clients. They must follow ethical practice and be duty-bound to 
maintain confidentiality in such cases.

Young Woman and 
Menstrual Health 
Issues 

Case Study 5: Hema’s 
Search to Get Answer 
for Her Menstrual 
Cycle
Hema is 16 years old. It 
has been 2 years since 
she started menstruating. 
Her menstrual cycle is not 
very regular. Her cycle is 
disturbed and she bleeds 
every 1.5 to 2 months. 
Sometimes the bleeding is only for 2 days and sometimes there is spotting for 7-8 
days. When she tells this to her mother, she says that it is very common and it will 
get regular. However, she continues to feel worried and decides to visit the female 
doctor in the PHC with her elder sister. 
The doctor asks her about her menstrual cycle, prescribes a medicine and tells her 
to visit again after her next cycle. When Hema asked the doctor why her cycle was 
disturbed, the doctor also says that it is very common and there is nothing to worry 
about. The session lasted only for 2 minutes. 
Hema was not satisfied with the response as she didn’t understand the reason for 
her irregular cycle and how the medication would regularise her cycle. She however, 
decides to take the medication prescribed and make the visit next month. 

Important Observations from the Case
1. Hema feels worried about irregular menstrual flow and when she communicates it to 
her mother, she does not receive a satisfactory response. 
2. Hema convinces her sister to visit the doctor. The doctor gives only 2 minutes of time to 
her, prescribes medicine and schedules a follow-up visit. 
What did the doctor do right?
1. The doctor took a note of Hema’s irregular menstrual cycle. 
2. The doctor prescribes a medicine and suggests a follow-up visit.
What was not right and what additional steps could the doctor have taken?
1. The doctor rushed the consultation and did not properly counsel Hema. She did not 
understand what concerns Hema had, and did not provide an answer to Hema’s 
question about why she was having an irregular cycle. Based on Hema’s existing 
knowledge, the provider could also have counseled her on hormonal changes, 
physiology of menstruation, and nutritious diet. 
2. The doctor could have encouraged the client to ask questions. As young people are 
curious to ask questions related to their bodies, it is the doctor’s duty to ensure that they 
provide comprehensive information to them. 
3. The doctor did not give sufficient counselling on menstrual issues and menstrual 
hygiene, and she did not ask Hema if she had any further questions. This would have 
led to Hema being more satisfied with the consultation, and she would have come back 
for follow-up visits. 


Enabling Young People to Decide About Services 
Case Study 6: Who’s Right to Decide?
Aradhana is 25 years old and lives with her husband and father-in-law in Gwalior. 
Aradhana and her husband have completed one year of marriage. Aradhana works 
in a bank and enjoys her work. Last month Aradhana missed her period and when 
she did a pregnancy test at home, the result was positive. 
As it was an unwanted pregnancy, she feels that she is not prepared for it yet and 
wants to focus on her professional life. Aradhana visits a female doctor in a private 
clinic. She is accompanied by a colleague. She tells the doctor that undertook a 
pregnancy test and feels unprepared for it. 
The doctor repeated the pregnancy test, and found it as positive. The doctor 
congratulates her for her first pregnancy. Aradhana explains to her that she is not 
ready yet. The doctor tries to cheer her up and says that she should think of her 
family’s happiness also. If she aborts her pregnancy, she may not be able to conceive 
again and become a mother. She tells Aradhana that it is better not to have this 
abortion, and if she still wants, she should come back with her husband for his 
consent.
Important Observations from the Case
1. Aradhana is certain about her decision to not have a child from this pregnancy. Since 
she visits the facility with her friend, she has her friend’s support. 
2. The doctor believes that since this is Aradhana’s first pregnancy, she should continue it. 
In the counseling, she says that if Aradhana aborts, she may not be able to get pregnant 
again. 
What did the doctor do right?
1. The doctor undertook Aradhana’s pregnancy test immediately. 
2. The doctor’s attitude towards Aradhana was respectful and she listened to her concern.
What did the doctor not do right?
1. The doctor forced/ coerced Aradhana to involve her husband. 
• According to the Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) Act, it is Aradhana’s legal 
right to get safe abortion as per her decision. It is a pregnant woman’s independent 
decision to terminate the pregnancy. Service providers must acknowledge her decision 
and provide the services accordingly. It is the service provider’s duty to support her in 
this and abide by the principle of Justice.  
• Should the doctor be concerned about what the family would like or respect 
Aradhana’s decision?   
 
Neither the doctor, nor Aradhana are under no legal obligation to consult her husband 
or family members for termination of pregnancy if she does not wish to. The provider 
may counsel her husband if needed, but only after seeking her consent. It is the 
woman’s right to decide whether to continue the pregnancy or undergo termination of 
a pregnancy and make a choice on the abortion procedure she wants to undergo and 
postabortion contraception she wants to use.  
2. The doctor provided inaccurate information.
• It is incorrect to say that if a pregnancy is aborted, a woman will not get pregnant 
again. If the abortion is provided hygienically using saf technique, there are almost 
no chances of woman developing infertility.  
 
It is a common myth that abortion leads to infertility. Research has shown that it 
is unsafe abortion that may lead to developing an infection and an infection can 
cause tubal infertility. If abortion is done using safe technique (medical abortion or 
manual vacuum aspiration), and by a skilled provider, it cannot lead to infertility. It is 
mandatory for the doctors to have accurate information and not propagate myths. For 
comprehensive pre-abortion counselling, MoHFW guidelines can be followed.15 
What additional steps could the doctor have taken?
1. Without any delay, the doctor could have acknowledged Aradhana’s decision and 
affirmed her right by starting with counselling on the procedure.
2. The doctor could have provided her proper counselling and help her decde whether she 
wanted to continue r terminate the pregnancy, and based on that, if Aaradhana decided 
to terminate, the doctor should have helped her access comprehensive abortion care 
services. 
Key messages
1. For a client above 18 years, she is entitled to take her independent decision to abort. 
The MTP Act affirms the same. The doctor should not insist on consent from a parent or 
guardian or spouse.
2. Safe abortion does not lead lead to infertility. The doctors should refrain from 
propagating this myth. 
3. The service provider should enable a client to access comprehensive abortion care 
(CAC) services, if they chose to do so. 

Adolescents And SRH Issues 
Case Study 7: Experiencing Nightfall
Sohail is 14 years old. He lives in a town in Jhansi. He and his friends come back 
from school together in the afternoon. One day Sohail tells his friends that he has 
been waking up in the morning with wet underwear. He sometimes also feels 
pressure in his penis and the urge to rub his penis. Two of his friends begin to make 
fun of him and start saying, “you have grown up.” Sohail is confused and does not 
get an answer to his question. He feels disgusted and thinks that something is wrong 
with him. One day Sohail secretly asks one of his other friends to visit a doctor with 
him. They had heard about a counselor in CHC and decided to make a visit there. 
He meets the male counselor there. Privacy was maintained during the consultation. 
He tells Sohail that what he is having is wet dreams. It is a very normal phenomenon 
and that the white fluid is semen which gets discharged from his body. When Sohail 
asks the counselor why this is happening, the counselor says that this is because he 
watches adult films. If he avoids watching adult films, he will not get wet dreams. 
Sohail feels shy to ask anything further and returns back.
Important Observations from the Case
1. Sohail is having wet dreams and he feels confused, curious as well as disgusted with 
it. Even when he attempts to confide in his friends, they do not provide him the correct 
information. 
2. Sohail manages to visit the counselor in CHC with a friend and the counselor explains 
to him that there is nothing wrong with his body. However, the provider’s suggestion of 
avoiding watching adult films did not encourage Sohail to ask any further questions. 
What did the counselor do right?
1. The counselor maintained the privacy norms during the consultation. 
2. The counselor explained to Sohail that having wet dreams is normal which makes him 
feel relaxed. 
3. The counselor also provides him with correct information about the white fluid (semen) 
which encourages Sohail to ask the next question. 
What did the counselor not do right?
1. The counselor provided inaccurate information.  
 
It is a myth that pornographic films cause wet dreams. The provider should ensure 
that they have accurate information so that they do not end up propagating myths. 
The fact about wet dreams is that it is common for adolescent boys to have wet dreams  
as they grow up. This happens because sometimes semen comes out of the body at 
night, during sleep. It is also called Nocturnal Emission, or Night Fall. Nocturnal 
Emission is not necessarily accompanied by sexual feelings or sexual dreams. These 
start happening around puberty and some boys get quite embarrassed or frightened by 
this. Masturbation leads to a reduction of nocturnal emission. Nocturnal Emission is a 
normal occurrence.
2. Wet dreams are not signs of an illness and do not lead to weakness.  Because semen 
is produced continuously in the body, it does not lead to exhaustion of semen. Semen 
cannot be stored in the body at the rate at which it is produced and therefore, it comes 
out of the body involuntarily during sleep in puberty.
What additional steps could the counselor have taken?
1. The counselor should have provided comprehensive information and created a safe 
space to tell him about masturbation. 
2. The counsellor should have taken verbal feedback to ensure that all his questions were 
answered and he had an overall positive experience. 

Adolescents and 
Body Image Issues 
Case Study 8: Arshi 
Goes for Counselling 
for Experiencing 
Bullying
Arshi is 17 years old and 
studies in a co-ed private 
school in Bhopal. She is 
an average performing 
student in her class. 
Since a few years, she has 
become very conscious 
of her body. Everyone in her class teases her for having big breasts. She feels 
embarrassed and uncomfortable in sharing this with anyone. 
Arshi begins to limit herself from making friends also. She remains aloof and finds 
it hard to concentrate in class. One day, a school teacher discovers that the students 
have been bullying her. The school teacher requests her to bring her mother to 
school. 
The school teacher informs her mother that the students have been teasing her 
because of her breast size. She tells her mother to take her to a doctor. Arshi develops 
extreme fear after witnessing this conversation between them. She begins to blame 
herself for the situation, 
resulting in poor mental 
health. Following her 
teacher’s advice, her 
mother takes her to 
a female doctor in a 
government paediatric 
hospital. 
The doctor gives 
2 minutes of time 
attentively. Her mother is 
there with her throughout 
the session. She explains 
to her mother that there is 
nothing wrong with her, 
it’s completely normal to 
experience an increase 
in the breast size during adolescence. The doctor tells Arshi a few exercises that can 
help in reducing the breast size. Arshi returns back home with intensified pressure of 
reducing her breast size.
Important Observations from the Case
1. Arshi is being bullied and body shamed by her peers because her breast size is 
increasing. Due to shame attached to women’s breasts in society, Arshi is unable to 
confide in anyone to discuss her problem and feels the pressure of reducing the breast 
size. The medical service provider attempts to normalise the increase in breast size as 
part of the development stage. 
2. Arshi’s mother and school teacher show concern for her but their intervention does 
not improve Arshi’s mental health situation and she feels the pressure of reducing the 
breast size.
What did the provider do right?
1. During the session, the doctor communicates that it is normal to have big breasts. 
2. The provider is attentive during the session. 
What did the doctor not do right?
1. The doctor missed the opportunity to have a private and confidential discussion with 
Arshi in her mother’s absence. If the doctor had maintained privacy, it probably would 
have helped the doctor in getting a comprehensive understanding of Arshi’s mental 
health needs. 
2. The doctor did not probe to understand any signs of deteriorating mental health. The 
doctor must ask probing questions in the session. For example, “How do you feel now 
that you are in adolescence and your body is going through physical changes?”, “what 
makes you uncomfortable if your breast size is increasing?”, “has anyone ever teased 
you for it?”, “have you confided into anyone when you were teased?” Many experiences 
related to bodily changes and bullying impact mental and emotional wellbeing of a 
person. Unlike physical health, mental health symptoms are not always visible. Being 
attentive to issues of overall mental health and wellbeing of the young people can help 
providers in identifying the symptoms.  
 
The doctor can refer the clients to the correct department for mental health screening 
tests, if they are not trained in undertaking screening tests and providing therapy or 
medication. Non-specialists should remember that prolonged experiences of harassment 
and bullying are drivers of adverse mental health outcomes and impact the overall well-
being of a person with symptoms that manifest in various forms for example, lower self-
confidence, feeling lonely, aloof and depressed. 
3. The doctor did not help Arshi understand the biological factors responsible for the 
increase in breast size. The doctor could have provided information about the size of 
breasts, she should have told that Estrogen and progesterone hormones are primarily 
responsible for the development of breasts. This information about hormonal changes 
during adolescence would also have helped Arshi understand her body better. 
4. Doctor did not provide enough time to Arshi.  She was given only 2 minutes of time. 
Arshi also does not feel better after the session. It is important to ensure that the 
provider provides enough time to the client and take feedback at the end of the session. 


Right Age for Women 
to Have Autonomy 
Case Study 9: 
Affirming Kajal’s 
Autonomy
Kajal is a 24-year-old 
woman working as a clerk 
in the Indian Railways. 
She has been married for 
2 years and her husband 
travels frequently on the 
job. She is not interested 
in having children any 
time soon. So Kajal visits 
the nearby PHC for 
contraceptive counselling. 
There she is directed to a separate room where the ANM greets her and closes the 
door behind the client. 
  35
The ANM then asks Kajal how she can help her. Kajal gives the ANM details about 
her background and informs her that she is seeking contraceptive counselling. The 
ANM points out that Kajal is already 24, and that the longer Kajal waits, she is 
bound to develop complications during child-birth. The ANM asks Kajal why she 
doesn’t want to have any children. Kajal explains that she and her husband have 
decided that they would like to focus on their respective careers and think about 
having children only when their financial situation improves.
The ANM advises Kajal that 25 is an ideal age for first delivery, and that by 
30 a woman’s reproductive capabilities begin to decline. Kajal looks worried 
but continues to ask for contraceptive counselling. Thus, the ANM gives Kajal 
information about condoms, emergency contraception and non-hormonal oral 
contraceptive pills (Centchroman) but also asks Kajal to consider not delaying her 
pregnancy further.
Important Observations from the Case
1. Kajal is clear that she does not want to have children any time soon.
2. The provider’s repeated warnings and her provision of only short acting contraception 
is indicative of provider bias.
What did the provider do right?
The ANM upheld Kajal’s privacy  by closing the door behind her so that Kajal could 
comfortably share all details assured of confidentiality .
What information should the ANM provide on the right time to have a child?
1. There is no fixed or right age to have a child. It depends on when the couple is ready to 
plan and become parents. Economic factors, professional careers, individual preference 
are some of the factors that are important for family planning.
2. Biologically, each woman’s individual’s body and sexual and and reproductive fertility 
is unique and different from another individual’s. Women are able to have children 
from post-menarche through their menopause. As long as women are ovulating, they 
can conceive and have a child unless they have been diagnosed with a condition. 
3. Moreover, a woman’s fertility is not the only factor responsible for pregnancy. Sperm 
count of the male partner is also a factor. 
4. Not all women desire to become mothers. If a woman does not want to have children, 
her right should be respected by the service providers and she should be provided 
contraceptives to manage her fertility.  

Do you think that the ANM respected Kajal’s autonomy?
By propagating inaccurate and highly generalised information on women’s age of fertility, 
the ANM is placing unwarrented pressure on the client to influence her decision around 
pregnancy and childbirth, not respecting that Kajal was financially unprepared to bear a 
child. If Kajal, threatened by the potential decline of ability to conceive and her fertility 
were to bear a child, she may be unable to access the resources necessary to support the 
health, growth and well-being of the child leading to adverse health outcomes of the 
newborn. Thus, the ANM is violating Kajal’s right to make autonomous choice to delay 
child birth, as well as not acting in the best interest of the client.
How can the ANM provide the method of contraception according to Kajal’s need?
The ANM should have asked if and when she wants to have children in future? Depending 
on her short-term/ long-term need, the ANM should have provided comprehensive 
information on long-acting and reversible contraceptives like condoms, emergency 
contraception, different types of oral contraception, injectables, IUCDs etc. and left it to 
the client to make a decision as to which contraceptive would best respond to her needs. 
Instead of withholding comprehensive information on the full range of contraception 
including emergency contraception, the ANM has limited the client’s choice, and invading 
their autonomy.

Discussion on Masturbation 
Case Study 10: Samar’s Privacy is Paramount
Samar is 16 years old and masturbates regularly. When he reveals this to close 
friends, they tell him that masturbating will lead to decline in his ‘masculinity’ 
(‘mardaangi ’). 
Samar is anxious and approaches the PHC. At the OPD, he is directed to the nurse 
in charge of providing youth friendly health services. Samar walks into a large room 
where two nurses are seated. He walks up to one of them, and she asks him to draw 
a curtain that separates her from the adjacent provider, and then asks him to tell her 
what the issue is. Samar is conscious because there are many clients, old and young, 
are within earshot and consulting other doctors simultaneously. So Samar tells 
her that he is undergoing a lot of pressure and stress. The nurse asks him what the 
reason behind the stress is. Samar says in a low tone, ‘exams and friends’.
The nurse counsels Samar on peer pressure and advises him that he should feel no 
compulsion to do anything that he is not comfortable with. She asks him if there is 
anything in particular that his friends have been taunting him about. Samar says 
that his friends make fun of him saying that he touches his ‘private parts’. The nurse 
immediately warns Samar that it is easy to get addicted to masturbation and hands 
Samar a prescription for a muscle relaxant and asks him to leave. 
Important Observations from the Case
1. Samar is hesitant and ashamed to talk openly about his actual concern - masturbation. 
2. The nurse is not the same sex as Samar, and this could further prevent Samar from 
talking about masturbation.
3. Samar fears judgment from both the nurse, as well as the clients within earshot.
What did the nurse do right?
The nurse counselled Samar on peer pressure and reassured him that he need not do 
anything that he is not comfortable doing.
Do you think Samar received the information he was looking for? Do you think Samar 
will ever consult the nurse again?
No, Samar did not receive comprehensive and non-judgemental counselling on safe sexual 
health practices for the following reasons.
1. The first and foremost duty of providers is to promote SRH health seeking behaviours 
by normalising all SRH concerns including sexual health related concerns.
As mentioned earlier, SRH seeking behaviours among youth, especially adolescents, 
is very low. Most clients seeking SRH services are embarrassed to talk about the issue, 
due to the stigma attached to SRH issues. Hence, in the initial moments, it is common 
for the client seeking an SRH service to be vague and less descriptive. However, it is 
the provider’s duty to patiently probe and draw out the specific issue that the client 
seeks to redress. In Samar’s case, the nurse demonstrates both judgment and discomfort 
by hurriedly prescribing a muscle-relaxant upon learning that Samar was seeking 
information on masturbation’. 
2. Providers themselves must be equipped with evidence-based knowledge on sexual 
health and reproductive health issues, and must be comfortable with facilitating honest 
and open dialogue on the full range of SRH issues including sexual health concerns such 
as masturbation and STIs. 
Masturbation is not addictive unless and until one becomes dependent on it for deriving 
stress relief. However, one does not masturbate only to relieve themselves from stress. 
Masturbation is more commonly, a healthy and safe way for all youth to derive pleasure, 
as well as explore their sexuality. In this case, the provider neither probes into the cause 
or frequency of masturbation. Instead, provider bias and stigma leads to the transaction 
of misinformation and false panic. Masturbation is a healthy and safe way for all youth to 
explore their sexuality and derive pleasure, as long as it is undertaken
• in private, or
• in front of a partner, after having obtained their consent. 
• does not replace healthier coping mechanisms for stress management    


Consent for Medical Examination 
Case Study 11: Sharon can Consent to a Medical Examination
Sharon is a 15-year-old girl who has been sexually abused by her father 3 days 
ago. Sharon’s mother and aunt are refusing to believe Sharon, and are saying that 
incident may have occurred in her dreams. Confused and scared, Sharon confides 
to a teacher from school, who in keeping with the POCSO Act of 2012, reports the 
incident to the nearby police station as well as accompanies Sharon to the district 
hospital, for a medical examination. 
Sharon and the teacher are directed to the CHC where a male doctor invites them 
to his cabin. He shuts the door, asks them to take a seat and enquires as to what the 
problem is. Sharon sits in silence and does not speak. The teacher explains to the 
doctor the details regarding Sharon’s case, and requests the doctor to undertake a 
thorough medical examination. 
The doctor says that medical examination cannot be undertaken without obtaining 
the consent of Sharon’s natural guardian, her mother. He asks Sharon to return with 
her mother.As providers, it is important to normalise sexual health and provide evidence-based 
information towards promoting the health and well-being of youth.
Important Observations from the Case
1. Medical examination presents a critical opportunity to treat the client in case of 
sustained cuts, bruises, infections and/or injuries. It is also an opportunity to gather 
evidence of sexual assault.
2. Neither Sharon’s mother nor aunt are ready to believe Sharon or support her. Thus they 
are unlikely to accompany her to the hospital.
3. Sharon is at risk of being dissuaded or emotionally manipulated by her mother and 
aunt, once she returns home. This could result in her medical examination being 
delayed indefinitely, which is a setback to securing her health, wellbeing and Rights.
What did the service provider do right?
The provider ensures Sharon’s privacy by counselling her in a separate room and ensuring 
that there was visual and auditory privacy. He ensured that the door is shut and that 
another truted female (her teacher) is with her.  
Did the service provider adhere to the guidelines of the POCSO Act of 2012?
No, the provider did not provide appropriate services. 
As per the POCSO Act of 201216, a female victim of Child Sexual Abuse can only be 
examined by a female service provider. Therefore, the provider should have referred this 
case to a qualified female colleague. 
As per the guidelines, the provider should obtain the informed consent of the survivor 
between the ages of 12 and 18 and no one else. The guidelines have been drafted to 
privilege the autonomy of the survivor  over paternalistic agency of the provider/parent/
guardian. Therefore, both ethically and legally, important things to remember while taking 
informed consent are as follows: 
• Sharon’s consent must be sought at each and every stage: 
• Before undertaking the medical examination, before collection of sample for 
medical/forensic evaluation and
• Before filing a medico-legal case and providing information to the police.ice.
• If the medical procedure or modalities use too much technical language, then it must 
be revised to a language that the survivor/victim understands and must incorporate 
comprehensive explanation of procedure of examination, evidence collection from 
body/genitals and treatment modalities. 
What is the role of the providers in case client reports consensual sexual activity before 
the age of 18?
If the provider gets a client who reports to have had consensual sexual activity before 18 
and needs abortion or HIV testing, the provider must ensure taking the following steps:
1. The provider cannot deny services and must focus on provision of services.
2. The provider is mandated to file a medico-legal case as per the POCSO Act, even if it 
is consensual sexual activity. The law fails to respect the sexual autonomy of young 
people by having the mandatory reporting clause because the reporting results in 
compromising their confidentiality. Since it is a huge legal barrier, the role of providers 
becomes more crucial here to protect the sexual autonomy of young people. The 
providers can support the client by  building their own network with human rights 
lawyers and activists who are trained in providing legal and emotional support in such 
cases. The providers can put the client in touch with the trained lawyers and activists, 
be non-judgemental towards the client and remember the clause of ‘doing no harm’.

Young Woman And Postpartum Contraception 
Case Study 12: What’s the Client’s Need!
Sahiba is a 27-year-old mother of 1 male child and is currently 8 months pregnant. 
She is visiting the PHC for her antenatal check up, and is directed to an ANM. Once 
the ANM concludes Sahiba’s physical examination, the ANM encourages Sahiba to 
start thinking about postpartum contraception by explaining the health benefits of 
postpartum contraception. Sahiba asks the ANM about the contraceptive options 
that would be available to her 
The ANM gives Sahiba comprehensive information on the health benefits and 
procedure of insertion of PPIUCD. Sahiba is reluctant and says that she would prefer 
to try some short-term options. The ANM again warns Sahiba that since she would 
have just given birth to a child and that she would have to ensure at least 2-3 years of 
gap so that her own health can be restored. 
She even emphasises that the PPIUCD is immediately reversible and does not 
impede lactation. Sahiba is still hesitant to choose the PPIUCD, as she is scared of 
inserting something in her uterus, and asks the ANM for information regarding 
some other short acting options. The ANM says, “Why? Are you thinking of bringing 
more children into this world? Aren’t 2 enough?” Then, she once again emphasises 
that the PPIUCD is the best and safest postpartum method, and urges Sahiba to think 
about it. She also assures Sahiba that her mother-in-law will never find out about the 
PPIUCD insertion.
Important Observations from the Case
1. The woman is clearly uncomfortable with the IUD option and is repeatedly asking the 
provider for other options.
2. The ANM is ignoring the woman’s discomfort and promoting a single contraceptive 
option, thereby violating the principles of autonomy and truthfulness. 
What did the ANM do right?
1. The ANM initiated an important discussion around postpartum contraception with 
Sahiba, thereby enabling Sahiba to think about the same.
2. The provider gave comprehensive information on PPIUCD to Sahiba.
3. The provider informed Sahiba about the importance of spacing in between child birth.  
What did the ANM not do right?
1. The ANM did not offer the different contraceptive options to Sahiba and straight away 
suggested PPIUCD. 
2. The ANM breached Sahiba’s autonomy. She urged Sahiba to choose PPIUCD without 
telling her about other contraceptive choices. 
3. The ANM did not provide full counselling and the need for postpartum contraception 
to woman, e.g. the risk of fertility is as early as 4 weeks after delivery, and that the LAM 
is 98% effective if exclusive breastfeeding is used and all orher conditions are fulfilled. 
4. Even if the client chooses to bear a third child, the provider cannot humiliate the woman 
for it. The ANM’s accusatory and judgmental tone is a form of obstetric violence and 
will directly lead to client withdrawal. Sahiba may not return for antenatal check-ups, or 
withdraw from contraceptive services altogether. 
What are the different contraceptive choices the ANM could have told her about?
National Family Planning Program offers a wide range of reversible contraceptives for 
postpartum period, e.g. (a) Centchroman (Chhayaa), (b) Injectable contraceptive MPA or 
Antara (can be taken 6 weeks after delivery), (c) Condoms (male partner), (d) Lactational 
amenorrhea method, or LAM, and (e ) PPIUCD. Some women may want to start an IUD 
after 6 weeks of delivery. Many women may not be willing to have PPIUCD inserted at the 
time of delivery amd may instead want to use one of the other methods. The ANM should 
have told her about all these choices of letting woman decide what she wanted, instead of 
assuming what was in her interest.


Young People 
and Need for HIV 
Counseling, Testing 
and Treatement 
Case Study 13: 
Sunil’s Entitlement to 
Treatment
Sunil is 19 years old, 
unmarried young boy 
and lives in a village. He 
is studying in college. 
He volunteers his time 
at an NGO where he 
educates people on safe 
sex and HIV prevention. 
 Sunil visits the male service provider once for his HIV testing. The service provider 
inquires “why do you need HIV testing?” Sunil says that he had had unprotected sex 
with his partner a few days ago. The service provider further asks if he is married 
to his partner. Sunil says that he has a male partner and they are not married. The 
service provider in a polite manner responds “Sunil, how do you have sex with a 
man? I want to know”. 
Sunil gets embarrassed and asks if he can get his test done. The provider then 
responds, “Sunil, I want to talk to you as my own child. I’m telling you so that you 
can learn early in life and develop interest for girls. If someone gets to know about 
it, it will bring shame to your family. And your families will be ostracized from 
society.” After saying this, the provider gets him tested and tells him to visit again 
the next day to collect the report. 

Important Observations from the Case
1. Sunil is a confident and affirmative young boy who visited independently to seek HIV 
testing services. 
2. In the initial part of the session, the service provider assumed that Sunil is in a 
heterosexual relationship. Whereas, Sunil responded affirmatively and disclosed his 
same-sex sexual relationship. The service provider invaded his privacy by asking how 
he has sex with a man. Even though the provider used a polite tone in the counseling 
session but also advised him to develop interest in girls. 
What did the provider do right?
1. The provider addressed Sunil by his name in an attempt to build trust. 
2. The provider provided HIV testing services to him and attempted to take his sexual 
history.
What did the provider not do right?
1. The provider asked the client why they needed a sexual health service. It is the right of 
a young person to access sexual health services, and the reason for HIV testing is not 
important to receive the services. 
2. The provider asked the marital status of the client. This was perhaps to understand the 
sexual history of the client. 
Is it necessary to ask the marital status from all the clients? 
1. Can the provider instead ask if they are sexually active or not? Unmarried youth who 
are sexually active feel uncomfortable in disclosing their sexual history. Marital status should not be a qualifier to receive the services and the providers should ask the sexual 
history of the client with a non-judgmental tone and empathetic body language. 
2. The provider communicated the societal value judgment to Sunil on his relationship 
with a man. The service provider did not treat Sunil as an individual who can make 
decisions for himself or feel attracted to men. 
What should the provider do if a client disclosed that they are gay?
1. They should understand that people have diverse sexual desires and sexual practices. 
Not everyone in our society feels attracted to people of opposite sex. It is highly 
recommended that they do not advise clients to feel attraction towards opposite sex as it 
is against the principle of rights-based access to healthcare. 
2. The provider can affirm the client’s right to choice. If the client discloses that they are 
gay or lesbian, tell them that there is nothing wrong in it. They should acknowledge the 
courage it took to disclose this information.
3. Provider should counsel them on the need for having some tests regularly such as 
VDRL, HIV and other tests if needed. 
4. They should reassure the clients that they would protect their confidentiality. 
How should providers ask about the sexual history? 
1. The provider can begin by telling the client that to provide them good care, they need to 
know the sexual history. Ask politely “Can I know if you are sexually active?” Further 
probes can be, “do you have a male partner/ female partner?”, “do you use protection 
while having sex?”, “when did you last have unprotected sex?” 
What additional steps could the provider have taken?
1. The provider could have done sexual health counseling with comfort, ease and 
calmness. Sexual health counseling includes discussion on safe and unsafe sexual 
practices. The provider should be comfortable in talking about anal sex and multiple 
other sexual practices. Condom use in anal sex is an important part of the safe sex 
counseling that can be stressed upon.
2. Young clients can be extremely scared and in a vulnerable situation if they have had 
unsafe sex, it is important to make them feel comfortable during the session. 

4. Clarifying Myths And Misconceptions 
In this section prevailing myths and misconceptions among adolesents and young people 
are discussed. It is important that service providers should address the myths on SRH 
issues prevelant among this population group. They should not ridicule clients while 
probing the myths and misconceptions, instead they should have a nonjudgmental 
attitude, should discuss the views and questions of clients and should dispel them through 
evidences or scientific explanations.

1. On an average, adolescent development begins right from the age of 
10, young people begin to enter into puberty and experience physical, 
mental and emotional transformation. Between the ages of 10 and 15, 
adolescents experience menarche or their first nightfall, and around the 
same time it is commonplace for them to begin to experience pressure 
of getting married. 
At this critical juncture, their lack of knowledge when combined with 
their diminished personal autonomy renders them vulnerable to 
sexual exploitation and adverse SRH outcomes. To deny them relevant 
information on SRH is to deny their diverse needs and realities. Thus, 
it is imperative for adolescents and youth to have access to evidence 
based and medically accurate information around their bodies and 
sexuality, so that they are equipped to take informed decisions that 
safeguard their health and wellbeing.

2. Emergency contraceptive pills are not dangerous to a woman’s 
health and have no known serious medical complications. There is 
no evidence that if a woman uses ECPs multiple times, it causes any 
health risks. They can cause minor side effects, such as menstrual 
irregularities and nausea, which typically last only a short time. This is 
because the dose of hormone is very small, and there is only one dose 
involved. These effects are not medically harmful. 
Women should feel free to use the emergency contraceptive pill 
whenever they think it’s necessary18. Each woman should decide for 
herself whether they are acceptable for her

3. No, giving ECPs in advance does not discourage regular contraceptive 
use, and it is essential so that women can start ECP as early as possible, 
but definitely within 72 hours of unprotected intercourse. Studies of 
women given ECPs in advance report these findings20:
• Women who had ECPs on hand took them sooner after having 
unprotected sex than women who had to seek out ECPs. Progestin-
only ECPs are more likely to be effective when taken sooner.
• Women given ECPs ahead of time were more likely to use them 
when needed than women who had to go to a provider to get ECPs.
• Women continued to use other contraceptive methods as they did 
before obtaining ECPs in advance.
• Women did not have unprotected sex more often.
Additionally, ECPs help a woman avoid pregnancy after:
• Any unprotected sex, including sexual coercion and rape and 
• Mistakes or failures in using contraception, such as:
• Condom was used incorrectly, slipped, or broke, 
• Centchroman missed by > 7 days 
• Woman has missed her MPA injection by more than 4 weeks 
after scheduled date and has unprotected sex
• Fertility awareness method not used correctly (failed to abstain 
or use another method during fertile days),
• Man failed to withdraw before ejaculation,
• Woman had unprotected sex after missing 3 or more combined 
oral contraceptive pills or after starting a new pill pack 3 or more 
days late, 
• IUD has come out

4. Taking ECPs is simple, and medical supervision is not needed. The 
label and instructions are easy to understand. In India, ECPs are 
approved for over-the-counter sales by chemists without a prescription.  

5. • On average, LNG ECPs reduce pregnancy by 59 to 95% for each 
individual act of intercourse; UPA ECPs reduce pregnancy by 
85% and have been found to be comparatively more effective than 
LNG. The precise efficacy of ECPs depends mostly on the woman’s 
cycle day when ECPs are taken and how soon they are taken after 
unprotected sex. There is no evidence to suggest that ECPs become 
less effective when used repeatedly. Repeat use of ECPs is classified 
as Level 1 in the World Health Organization’s Medical Eligibility 
Criteria.21 
• Moreover, although ECP can be used more than once in the same 
cycle, women who need continuous protection should be advised to 
use a regular contraceptive method since ECPs are not as effective 
as regular contraceptive methods.

6. • Emergency contraception plays an undeniably important role in the 
following scenarios:
• When one is unable to negotiate safe and protected sex
• In case of contraceptive failure.
• When one has limited or no access to other contraceptive options. 
Remember, it can be upto 95% effective if used within 24 hours, while 
its effectiveness declines with time. Therefore, if it is easily available, 
wide availability and access is essential to advance one’s control 
over their own fertility outcomes. Comprehensive counselling on 
how emergency contraception does not prevent sexually transmitted 
infections (STIs) can deter unsafe sexual intercourse. 
Irresponsible behaviour bears no connection to the availability of a 
commodity, instead could be a result of lack of accurate information 
and inappropriate shaping of gender related attitudes.

7. • ECPS are safe for adolescents. A study of ECP use among girls 13 
to 16 years old found it safe, and all of the study participants were 
able to use ECPs correctly. Also, access to ECPs does not influence 
sexual behavior

8. • Spousal/partner consent delays and deters a client’s access 
to contraception. Most importantly, conditional access to 
contraception is in direct violation of the medical principle of client 
autonomy that guarantees clients the right to choose whether, when 
and which (contraceptive method) to uptake.
• In many parts of India, a prevalent misconception is that 
contraception encourages adultery, owing to which males often 
restrict their female partners or wives from accessing contraception. 
Similarly, sometimes men avoid using condoms, as they are under 
the misconception that condoms will diminish their masculinity24. 
Under such circumstances, if providers insist that woman brings 
her husband/ partner for consent to use contraception, it will only 
serve as an additional barrier for a woman’s access to their SRHR. 

9. • If abortion is done using safe technique (medical abortion or 
manual vacuum aspiration), and by a skilled provider, it cannot 
lead to infertility. 
• Induced abortions by using medical abortion (MA) drugs (Tab 
mifepristone and misoprostol) doesn’t affect future fertility.25,26 
• Usually a safe surgical method of abortion (such as vacuum 
aspiration) will not affect future fertility of the woman. However, 
if proper infection prevetion procedures are not observed, there 
is a very small risk of infertility27 if a woman develops a uterine 
infection and it is not treated promptly which can spread and lead 
to pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). 
• Infact, getting unsafe abortions may lead to developing an infection 
and the infection may cause tubal infertility. 
• When surgical abortion is done using D&C technique, very rarely, 
there can be a risk of uterine scarring due to deep curettage (known 
as Asherman syndrome), resulting into infertility. However, please 
note that D&C is not a recommended technique of abortion.Adolescents might particularly need ECPs because of high rates of forced sex, stigma about 
obtaining contraceptives, limited ability to plan for sex, and errors in using contraceptives.  

10. • The need for abortion can arise at any point in a woman’s 
reproductive lifespan. It is in difficult circumstances that women 
decide to abort pregnancy. Reasons for abortion can be the 
following: 
• Unmet need of contraception resulting in unintended and 
unwanted pregnancy, 
• Sexual violence or coercion from partner, 
• Failure of contraception resulting in unintended and unwanted 
pregnancy
• Lack of autonomy for women to use a contraceptive of their 
choice 
• Change in circumstances of a pregnant woman’s life, for 
example divorce or death of the husband/ partner,
• Detected foetal anomaly 
• Trained service providers should be sensitive to these issues and 
shuld not deny providing comprehensive abortion care to women 
as per MTP Act, since continuation of pregnancy or denial of 
services can result to adverse health outcomes. 

11.• Medical abortion method has been approved by WHO as a 
safe, effective and acceptable method of abortion
The Indian 
government has approved this method in its national guidelines 
indicating mifepristone and misoprostol may be provided upto 
the 63rd day of gestation period.29 It is a non-invasive method 
of abortion and women can use the pills as per instructions by 
themselves. 
The risk of serious complicaitons after medical aboriton is extremely 
low, are very rare - the chances of incomplete abortion needing 
treatment is only 2-3%

12. • Transgenders do not have a mental disorder. Because the 
mainstream society only recognises two genders, men and 
women, transgender persons are stigmatised in society.
• When a child is born, a doctor typically assigns the sex ‘female’ 
or ‘male’ on the basis of genitals. However, gender-specific 
stereotypes related to one’s behaviour traits, roles, responsibilities, 
clothing and accessories are not inherited, but taught to us by 
society. Growing up, some people may choose to follow these 
norms/stereotypes, while others may challenge the same. People 
around us challenge and break gender norms and stereotypes all 
the time and gender norms and stereotypes keep changing too. 
• A transgender person is someone who rejects their gender 
assigned at birth, and makes a conscious decision to identify 
with an alternate gender of their choice. Transgender is an 
umbrella term for people who do not identify with the gender 
assigned to them at birth.  According to the Census of India, 
2011 there is a population of 4.9 lakh transgender persons in the 
country. This was the first Census which included an official 
counting of transgender people in the country. This counting only 
included transgender women (assigned gender male at birth) and 
not, transgender men (assigned gender female at birth).
• The Constitution of India guarantees citizens the right to make 
such decisions around their own bodies (personal autonomy) and 
expression, and the NALSA Judgment31 protects transpersons 
from discrimination and violence.
• In 2020, WHO also removed gender nonconformity (behavior or 
gender expression by an individual that does not match masculine 
or feminine gender norms) from the category of “disorder”. 
• It is important to ensure that the transgender community is not 
excluded from their access to quality healthcare, education and 
livelihood opportunities. Discrimination and violence pushes 
them to margins. It is important to build a society that upholds 
their right to equality. 

13. Irregular periods occur due to hormonal changes in the body. It 
cannot simply be assumed that a late or irregular period is due to 
pregnancy. Irregular periods are common during adolescence. 

14. • Some providers believe that women should have children before 
30 since their fertility may decline after that age, and to avoid 
complications. 
• Biologically the fact is that each woman’s body and fertility is 
unique and different from another individual’s. Women are able 
to have children from post-menarche through their menopause. 
As long as women are ovulating, they can conceive and have a 
child unless they have been diagnosed with a condition. 
• It is important to remember that there is no fixed or right age to 
have a child. It depends on when the couple is ready to plan and 
become parents. Economic factors, professional careers, individual 
preference are some of the factors that are important for family 
planning. 
• Moreover, a woman’s fertility is not the only factor responsible for 
pregnancy. Sperm count of the male partner is also a factor. 
• Not all women desire to become mothers in their twenties. 
Providers should help individuals and couples to have children 
when they are ready for it, and should provide contraceptives to 
manage their fertility. 
• If a woman does not want to have biological children, her right 
should be respected by the service providers. Except biological 
reproduction, adoption and assisted reproductive technology are 
also methods of having children. 

15. Several studies have shown that women who wear conservative 
clothing like salwar-kameez or sarees also experience violence. 
Clothes are not the reason for sexual violence. It is the patriarchal 
society and thinking that gives some men the thought that they have 
the license to abuse women. Therefore, this idea that women invite 
violence through their clothes needs to be challenged. It is important 
to stress the need for consent in any sexual relationship rather than 
blame women.   

16.• No, masturbation does not lead to blindness or impotency. 
Neither does it lead to a loss of sperms because they are being 
regularly produced by the body. 
• Masturbation is a natural and completely safe and secure method 
of obtaining sexual pleasure through stimulation of one’s own 
sexual organs. It is nothing to be ashamed about. All of us have 
sexual needs and this is a common way of fulfilling them. Only if 
it starts interfering with our day-to-day functioning in any way 
then a counsellor or medical practitioner may be referred to.

17. Entering the kitchen during menstruation wil not harm anybody. As 
long as general hygiene measures are followed, menstruating women 
can prepare and handle food just like any other day. 